January 20, 1806LewisTuesday [NB: Monday] January 20th 1806.
Visited this morning by three Clatsops who remained with us all day; the object of their visit is mearly to smoke the pipe.    on the morning of the eighteenth we issued 6 lbs. of jirked Elk pr. man, this evening the Sergt. repoted that it was all exhausted; the six lbs. have therefore lasted two days and a half only.    at this rate our seven Elk will last us only 3 days longer, yet no one seems much concerned about the state of the stores; so much for habit.    we have latterly so frequently had our stock of provisions reduced to a minimum and sometimes taken a small touch of fasting that three days full allowance excites no concern. In those cases our skill as hunters afford us some consolation, for if there is any game of any discription in our neighbourhood we can track it up and kill it.    most of the party have become very expert with the rifle. The Indians who visited us today understood us sufficiently to inform us that the whites did not barter for the pounded fish; that it was purchased and consumed by the Clatsops, Chinnooks, Cathlahmah's and Skillutes. The native roots which furnish a considerable proportion of the subsistence of the indians in our neighbourhood are those of a species of Thistle, fern and rush; the Liquorice, and a small celindric root the top of which I have not yet seen, this last resembles the sweet pittatoe very much in it's flavor and consistency.
ClarkWednesday [Monday]
20th January 1806
Visited this morning by three Clapsots who remained with us all day; the object of their visit is mearly to Smoke the pipe.    on the morning of the 18 inst. we issued 6 wt. of jurked meat pr. man, this evening the Serjt. reports that is all exhosted; the 6 w. have therefore lasted 2 days and a half only.    at this rate our Seven Elk will only last us 3 days longer, yet no one appears much concerned about the State of the Stores; So much for habet.    we have latterly so frequently had our Stock of provisions reduced to a minimum and Sometimes taken a Small tuck of fasting that 3 days full allowance exites no concern. In those Cases our Skill as hunters affords us Some Consolation, for if there is any game of any discription in our neighbourhood we can track it up and kill it.    most of the party have become very expect with the rifle. The Indians who visit us to day understood us Sufficiently to inform us that the white who visit them did not barter for the pounded fish; that it was purchased and Consumed by the Clatsops, Chin nooks, Cath lâh mâhs and Skil lutes, and Kil a moxs.
The native roots which furnish a considerable proportion of the Subsistance of the indians in our neighbourhoodd are those of a Species of Thistle, fern, and rush; the Licquorice, and a Small celindric root the top of which I have not yet Seen, this last resembles the Sweet potato verry much in its flavour and Consistency.Ordway
Monday 20th Jany. 1806.    rainy and wet.    the Crows and ravens verry pleanty about the fort.

GassMonday 20th.    It rained hard all day. Some of the natives again came to see us, whom we suffered, contrary to our usual practice, to remain in the fort all night; the evening was so wet and stormy. It also rained on the 21st and 22nd. Our hunters killed three elk. On my way with a party to bring in the meat of these, I saw some amazingly large trees of the fir kind; they are from 12 to 15 feet in diameter.

Whitehouse
Monday Janry 20    Wet & rainey weather during the whole of this day.    nothing material occured worth mentioning

Western bracken fern, Pteridium aquilinium L. var. pubescens Underw. See Lewis's detailed description of this species on January 22, 1806. Hitchcock et al., 1:93; Gunther (EWW), 14–15; Ray (LCEN), 120; Cutright (LCPN), 264, 274, 416.Giant horsetail, Equisetum talmateia Ehrh. Hitchcock et al., 1:47; Gunther (EWW), 15; Ray (LCEN), 120; Cutright (LCPN), 264.The identity of this species is not clear. It may be one of the roots described by Swan (NC), 88, but its identity is also unknown. The plant is mentioned again on January 24, with reference to this entry.A red vertical line runs through this paragraph, perhaps penned by Biddle.Shannon and Labiche, according to Lewis and Ordway.Perhaps Sitka spruce, Picea sitchensis (Bong.) Carr, which Lewis describes as a fir on February 4, 1806.