August 20, 1806ClarkWednesday 20th of August 1806
a violent hard rain about day light this morning.    all wet except myself and the indians.    we embarked a little after Sun rise    wind moderate and ahead.    we proceeded on at meridn.    passed the enterance of Cannonball river    imediately above is the remains of a large Sieoux encampment which appears to have been made this Spring.    at 3 P M passed the enterance of Wardepon River [NB: Scioux boundary to which they claim the country]    Saw great number of wolves on the bank Some Buffalow & Elk, tho' not so abundant as near the River Rochejhone. passed the place where we left the last encampment of Ricaras in the fall 1804 and encamped on a Sandbar from the N. E. Side, having made 81 miles only, the wind blew hard all day which caused the waves to rise high and flack over into the Small Canoes in Such a manner as to employ one hand in throwing the water out. The plains begin to Change their appearance    the grass is turning of a yellow colour. I observe a great alteration in the Corrent course and appearance of this pt. of the Missouri.    in places where there was Sand bars in the fall 1804 at this time the main Current passes, and where the current then passed is now a Sand bar— Sand bars which were then naked are now covered with willow Several feet high.    the enteranc of Some of the Rivers & Creeks Changed owing to the mud thrown into them, and a layor of mud over Some of the bottoms of 8 inches thick.
Ordway
Wednesday 20th August 1806.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on verry well    the after part of the day pleasant.    in the evening we Camped on a Sand beach    the Musquetoes verry troublesome.


GassWednesday 20th.    We embarked early after a heavy gust of wind and rain, and proceeded on very well. The forenoon was cloudy, without rain; and in the afternoon the weather became clear and pleasant.— We went about seventy miles, and encamped; where we found the musquitoes very troublesome.


The Cannonball River on the Morton-Sioux county line in North Dakota, first passed on October 18, 1804. Atlas map 27; MRC map 48.Clark called this "War-re-Con nee" River when they passed it on October 16, 1804; it is now Beaver Creek in Emmons County, North Dakota. Possibly Clark has confused the name with the "Eă-Neăh Wáu-de-pón," or Little Sioux River in Harrison County, Iowa; see August 8, 1804. Atlas map 27; MRC map 47.The camp was in Campbell County, South Dakota, probably below the mouth of Spring Creek, on Atlas map 26 a nameless stream flowing from a lake; see October 13, 1804. The site would now be inundated by Oahe Reservoir. MRC map 46.