July 11, 1805LewisThursday July 11th 1805.
We had now nothing to do but wait for the canoes; as they had not returned I sent out some of the small party with me to hunt; in the evening they returned with a good quantity of the flesh of a fat buffaloe which they had killed.    the canoes not arrived this evening. I saw several very large grey Eagles today they are a half as large again as the common bald Eagle of this country. I do not think the bald Eagle here qute so large as those of the U' States; the grey Eagle is infinitely larger and is no doubt a distinct species.    this evening a little before the sun set I heared two other discharges of this unaccounable artillery of the Rocky Mountains proceeding from the same quarter that I had before heard it. I now recollected the Minnetares making mention of the nois which they had frequently heard in the Rocky Mountains like thunder; and which they said the mountains made; but I paid no attention to the information supposing it either false or the fantom of a supersticious immagination. I have also been informed by the engages that the Panis and Ricaras give the same account of the Black mountains which lye West of them.    this phenomenon the philosophy of the engages readily accounts for; they state it to be the bursting of the rich mines of silver which these mounains contain.
This morning Capt. Clark dispatched Bratton to meet the canoes which were detained by the wind to get a couple of axes.    he obtained the axes and returned in about two hours.    this man has been unable to work for several days in consequence of a whitlow on one of his fingers; a complaint which has been very common among the men.    one of the canoes arrived at Capt. Clarks camp about 10 A. M.    this he had unloaded and set a few miles up the river for a buffaloe which had been killed, the party sent killed another in thir rout and brought in the flesh and skins of both    they 
were in good order; his hunters had also killed two deer and an Antelope yesterday.    the three other canoes did not arrive untill late in the evening in consequence of the wind and the fear of weting their loads which consisted of articles much more liable to be injured by moisture than those which composed the load of that which arrived in the morning. Capt. C. had the canoes unloaded and ordered them to float down in the course of the night to my camp, but the wind proved so high after night that they were obliged to put too about 8 miles above and remain untill morning. Capt. C. kept the party with him busily engaged at the canoes.    his hunters killed and brought in three very fat deer this evening.—ClarkJuly 11th Thursday 1805
a fair windey morning wind S. W. I dispatch W Bratten (who cannot work he haveing a tumer rising on his finger) to meat the Canoes & bring from them two axes, which is necessary for the work at the perogues or Canoes, and is indespenceable    he returned in about two hours & informed that one Canoe was within three miles, about 1 oClock the Canoe which Bratten left arrived haveing killed a Buffalow on the river above our Camp, at which place the bend of the river below & that above is about 1 mile apart, I dispatched Serjt. Pryor with 3 men in the Canoe to get the meat    they killed another buffalow near the one killed and brought the meat of both down.    at Sunset the 3 remaining Canoes arrived unloaded & returned imeadeately with orders to flote down to Camp at the portage to night for the purpose of takeing up the remaining baggage. Musquitors verry troublesom, and in addition to their torments we have a Small Knat, which is as disagreeable, our hunter killed 3 Deer to day one of them verry fat.    all the men with me engaged about the Canoes hunting &c. &.OrdwayJuly 11th Thursday 1805.    a clear morning.    the wind verry high from the N. W. which oblidged us to lay at Camp untill late in the afternoon, except the Canoe which had the baggage and tools.    they went on to Camp 2 men went by land to the Camp & got Some meat.    towards evening the wind abated So that we went on and arived at Capt. Clarks Camp at a Sunset, and unloaded.    the hunters had killed 2 fat buffalow and Several Deer.    we took on board Some fat meat and 4 of us Set out with 3 canoes to return back to the other Camp for the remainder of the baggage &.C.    we floated about 8 miles and the wind rose So high that drove us to Shore So we landed untill morning.    (Capt. Clark and party had got 2 fine trees cut for 2 canoes & ready to dig out.[)]

GassThursday 11th.    We continued here waiting for the return of the canoes until 2 o'clock; then four of us went out and killed a buffaloe and brought in part of the meat. The canoes did not come back this evening.

WhitehouseJuly 11th 1805 Thursday.    a clear morning, but high wind which obledged us to lay at our Camp untill late in the afternoon except the baggage canoe which went on.    2 of the men went up to the Camp and got Some meat.    towards evening the wind abated a little so that we went on arived at the upper Camp about Sunset and unloaded.    the hunters had killed 2 fat buffalow and Several Deer.    I walked a Short distance in the plains to day when we were waiting for the wind to abate, and trod on a verry large rattle Snake.    it bit my leggin on my legg I Shot it.    it was 4 feet 2 Inches long, & 5 Inches & a half round.    we took Some fat meat on board and 4 of us Set out with the 8 empty canoes to return to the lower Camp.    we floated apart of the 
night got about 8 miles    the wind rose So that we halted untill morning—    Capt. Clark had got 2 fine trees cut for 2 canoes and got them ready to dig out, &c—
Thursday July 11th    A Clear morning, but the wind was high, which obliged us to lay by at Camp, untill the afternoon with our Canoes, excepting the one loaded with baggage & Tools, which proceeded on, two of our party went off to the upper Camp for meat, which they brought to us, towards evening the wind abated, we then went on, & arrived at the upper Camp about sunset,—    where we unloaded the Canoes.    The hunters had killed 2 fat buffalo, and several deer, One of the party was near being bit by a Rattle snake, which he killed, it measured 4 feet 2 Inches in length & 5½ Inches round.—
A party of 4 Men set out from the Camp, with 3 empty canoes to return to the lower Camp to bring up the baggage &ca left there, they floated down the river a part of the night, & got about 8 Miles, when the wind rose so high, that they were forced to lay by till morning.—    Captain Clarks party cut down 2 large trees, and got them in readiness to dig out &ca—to make Canoes.—


Lewis's gray eagle may be the golden eagle; on the average they are smaller than the bald eagle. Burroughs, 207, 325 nn. 5, 6, 7, suggests that Lewis may have compared a female golden eagle to a male bald eagle. See also Coues (HLC), 2:409 n. 25. Holmgren considers this bird to be an immature bald eagle. It was probably Biddle who drew a red vertical line through the passage about the "grey Eagles."A whitlow is an infection, often extremely painful, under and around the nail and sometimes deep into the bone. Chuinard (OOMD), 297–98 n. 16.Rattlesnake incidents had apparently become so common that only Whitehouse reports it. It was a prairie rattlesnake.