October 4, 1804Clark
4th of October Thursday—    the Wind blew all night from the N W. Some rain    we were obliged to drop down 3 miles to get a Channel Sufficient Deep to pass    Several Indians on the bank, Call'd to us frequently to Land, one gave 3 yels & Sciped a Ball before us, we payed no attention to them, while at Brackfast one Swam across to us, beged for Powder, we gave him a Small piece of Tobacco & put him over on a Sand bar, passed a large Island in the middle of the river Good hope I.    Passed a small Creek L. S. passed a creek L S    Camped on a Sand bar at the upper point of an Island on which is the remains of an old ricara Village fortified Called La hoo call    It was circular, this Village appears to have been deserted about 5 or 6 years, 17 houses yet remain, the Island Contains but little timber, the evening verry Cold and wood Scerce, make use of Drift woodCourse & DistanceN. 18° W.8 ½m. to a point on the S. S.—    passed good hope IslandN. 12° E.1 ½m. on the S. S.    passd. a Creek L. S.N. 45° E.2m. on the S. point passed Le hoo calls Island—Clark4th of October Thursday 1804
the wind blew all night from the NW. Some rain, we were obliged to Drop down 3 miles to get the Chanel Suft. deep to pass up, Several Indians on the Shore viewing of us Called to us to land    one of them gave 3 yels & Sciped [X: Skipped] a ball before us, we payed no attention to him, proceeded on and Came too on the L. S. to brackft    one of those Indians Swam across to us beged for Powder, we gave him a piece of Tobacco & Set him over on a Sand bar, and Set out, the wind hard a head    (1) passed a Island in the middle of the river about 3 miles in length, we call Goodhope Island, (2) at 4 miles passed a (2) Creek on the L. S. about 12 yards wide Capt. Lewis and 3 men walked on Shore & crossed over to an (3) Island Situated on the S. S. of the Current & near the Center of the river    this Isld. is about 1½ miles long & nearly ½ as wide, in the <S. S. nearly opposit> Center of this Island was an old Village of the rickeries Called La ho catt    it was Circular and walled Containing 17 lodges and it appears to have been deserted about five years, the Island Contains but little timber.    we Camped on the Sand bar makeing from this Island, the day verry Cool.4th Octr.Course Distance & reffurence—N. 18° W.  8 ½miles to a pt. on the S. S.    passed an Island Goodhope in
the middle of the river (1)N. 12° E.  1 ½miles on the S. S.    passed a Creek on the L. S. (2)N. 45° E.  2miles on the S. pt.    passed an Island <and place> on which
there was a village (3) of Ricreries in the year 1797.    La
hoo-catt 12 OrdwayThursday 4th Oct. 1804.    we Set off eairly.    returned Back 3 miles    took the channel & proceeded on.    passed Several Indians on N. S.    at 9 oCock
halted took breakfast on S. S.    an Indian Swam the River to See us.    he asked for powder &.C.    proceeded on    passed an Island N. S.    passed a Creek on S. S. called Teed creek.    we Camped on a Sand beach at the upper point of an Island on N. S.


GassThursday 4th.    We set out early; but were obliged to return to the place where we halted yesterday at 12 and to take the other side of the river; the water was so shallow and sand bars so numerous. At 9 o'clock an Indian swam across the river to see us, when we stopped for breakfast. We informed him that we were not traders, that we had seen his chief and told him all we had to say. We proceeded on, passed a creek on the south side, called Teel creek, and encamped on the upper part of an island.

WhitehouseThursday 4 Oct. 1804.    Set off eairly.    at 9 oClock we halted for breakfast    an Indian Swam the river & came to us.    proceeded on    passed a creek on S. S. called Teed creek    Camped on the upper point of an Island.
Thursday October 4th    We set out early this morning, at 9 o'Clock A. M. We stopp'd to take our break fast, soon after, an Indian swam the River, and came to us; We proceeded on, and passed a Creek, lying on the South side of the River, called Teel Creek, and in the Evening, we encamped on the upper point of an Island

The Indian fired his musket and sent the ball skipping over the water.Probably later Pascal Island. See above, October 3, 1804; Atlas maps 10, 24; MRC map 43.Nameless on Atlas map 24; probably later Pascal Creek. MRC map 43. On Atlas map 24 this stream is Teel Creek, presumably from a teal duck. It is the later Stove (may be Stone), or Cherry, Creek, in Dewey County, South Dakota. MRC map 43.The island was the later Dolphees, or Lafferty, Island, lying between Dewey and Potter counties, South Dakota. The village appears clearly in Atlas map 24. The name of the village appears on Evans's map 4 (Atlas map 10). The area is now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Mattison (OR), 63; Ronda (LCAI), 43; MRC map 43; MRY map 91. The word, NAhuukaátA or "by the water," comes from the name of an Arikara band. Parks (BVAP), 225.