June 14, 1806LewisSaturday June 14th, 1806.
Sent our hunters out early this morning. Colter killed a deer and brought it in by 10 A. M.    the other hunters Drewyer returned early without having killed anything. Drewyer returned.    we had all our articles packed up and made ready for an early departure in the morning.    our horses were caught and most of them hubbled and otherwise confined in order that we might not be detained.    from hence to traveller's rest we shall make a forsed march; at that place we shal probably remain one or two days to rest ourselves and horses and procure some meat.    we have now been detained near five weeks in consequence of the snows; a serious loss of time at this delightfull season for traveling. I am still apprehensive that the snow and the want of food for our horses will prove a serious imbarrassment to us as at least four days journey of our rout in these mountains lies over hights and along a ledge of mountains never intirely destitute of snow.    every body seems anxious to be in motion, convinced that we have not now any time to delay if the calculation is to reach the United States this season; this I am detirmined to accomplish if within the compass of human power.
ClarkSaturday June 14th 1806
Sent out Hunters this morning    Colter killed a deer and brought it in by 10 A M    Drewyer did not return untill night    he wounded deer but could get none &c    [blank] neither of the other hunters killed <any> nothing.    we had our articles packed up ready for a Start in the morning, our horses Collected and hobble that they may not detain us in the morning.    we expect to Set out early, and Shall proceed with as much expedition as possible over those Snowey tremendious mountains which has detained us near five weeks in this neighbourhood waiting for the Snows to melt Sufficent for us to pass over them.    and even now I Shudder with the expectation with great dificuelties in passing those Mountains, from the debth of Snow and the want of grass Sufficient to Subsist our horses as about 4 days we Shall be on the top of the Mountain which we have every reason to beleive is Covered with Snow the greater part of the year.

Ordway
Saturday 14th June 1806. Some cloudy    Several hunters went out eairly    about 10 oClock Colter came in    had killed a deer and found eight ducks eggs.    the day verry warm
GassSaturday 14th.    We had a cloudy morning. Some hunters again went out; at 10 o'clock, one came in with a deer; and in the evening the rest of them, but they had not killed any thing.



The party's camp of September 9–11, 1805, and again June 30–July 3, 1806; see June 30, 1806.The captains mention Colter and Drouillard.Colter.