January 19, 1806LewisMonday [NB: Sunday]
January 9th 1806.
This morning sent out two parties of hunters, consisting of Collins and Willard whom we sent down the bay towards point Adams, and Labuish and Shannon whom we sent up Fort River; the fist by land and the latter by water.    we were visited today by two Clatsop men and a woman who brought for sale some Sea Otter skins of which we purchased one, giving in exchange the remainder of our blue beads consisting of 6 fathoms and about the same quantity of small white beads and a knife.    we also purchased a small quantity of train oil for a pair of Brass armbands and a hat for some fishinghooks.    these hats are of their own manufactory and are composed of Cedar bark and bear grass interwoven with the fingers and ornimented with varioius colours and figures, they are nearly waterproof, light, and I am convinced are much more durable than either chip or straw. These hats form a small article of traffic with the Clatsops and Chinnooks who dispose of them to the whites.    the form of the hat is that which was in vogue in the Ued States and great Britain in the years 1800 & 1801 with a high crown reather larger at the top than where it joins the brim; the brim narrow or about 2 or 2½ inches.
Several families of these people usually reside together in the same room; they appear to be the father & mother and their sons with their son's wives and children; their provision seems to be in common and the greatest harmoney appears to exist among them. The old man is not always rispected as the head of the family, that duty most commonly devolves on one of the young men. They have seldom more than one wife, yet the plurality of wives is not denyed them by their customs. These families when ascociated form nations or bands of nations each acknowledging the authority of it's own chieftain who does not appear to be heridatiry, nor his power to extend further than a mear repremand for any improper act of an individual; the creation of a chief depends upon the upright deportment of the individual & his ability and disposition to render service to the community; and his authority or the deference paid him is in exact equilibrio with the popularity or voluntary esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band or nation. Their laws like those of all uncivilized Indians consist of a set of customs which have grown out of their local situations.    not being able to speak their language we have not been able to inform ourselves of the existence of any peculiar customs among them.
ClarkTuesday [Sunday]
19th of January 1806
This morning Sent out two parties of hunters, one party towards Point adams and the other part up Ne tel River by water.    we were visited to day by two Clatsop men and a woman who brought for Sale Some Sea otter Skins of which we purchased one gave in exchange the remainder of our blue beeds Consisting of 6 fathoms, and the Same quantity of Small white beids and a knife.    we also purchased a Small quantity of train oil for a par of Brass arm bands, and a hat for Som fishinghooks. these hats are of their own manufactory and are Composed of Cedar bark and bear grass interwoven with the fingers and ornimented with various Colours and figures, they are nearly water proof, light, and I am Convinced are much more dureable than either Chip or Straw,—  These hats forom a article of traffic with Clatsops an Chinnooks who dispose of them to the whites, the form of the Hats is that which was in voge in the U States and Great Britain in 1800 & 1801 with a high Crown rather larger at the top than where it joins the brim, the brim narrow about 2 or 2½ inches.
Several families of those people usially reside together in the Same room; they appear to be the farther mother with their Sons and their Sons wives and children; their provisions appears to be in common and the greatest harmoney appears to exist among them.    the old man is not always respected as the head of the family that duty generally devolves on one of the young men. They have Sildom more than one wife, yet plurality of wives are not denyed them by their Customs.    those families when associated [form] bands of nations each acknowledgeing the authority of its own Chieftains, who does not appear to be heritatary, or has power to extend further than a mear repremand for any improper deportment of the individual his abiltity and disposition to render Service to the Comunity, and his authority and the defference paid him is in extent equilibrio with the popolarity or volintary esteem he has acquired among the individuals of his band, or nation. Their Laws like all uncivilized Indians Consist of a Set of customs which has grown out of their local Situations.    not being able to Speak their language we have not been able to inform ourselves of the existance of any peculiar Customs among them.
Ordway
Sunday 19th    4 men went out a hunting.    moderate Showers of rain.    the men in the fort are employed dressing Elk Skins for Mockasons, &C. Several of the natives visited us, and Sold us Several handsome Hats made of Some kind of Splits curiously worked &C.—


GassSunday 19th.    Four hunters went out this morning, which was fair with flying clouds; but in the evening it began to rain again. We had another visit 
from some of the natives.


Whitehouse
Sunday Janry 19th    This morning we had moderate showers of rain, 4 Men of our party went out from the fort a hunting.    the Men in the fort were employed in dressing Elk skins, Several of the natives visited us, & sold our Men several Hatts, which were made out of splits.    They were very handsome & curiously worked



Perhaps an error for Colter; Collins seems to have been with the saltmakers on the shore. See below, January 25, 1806.Lewis and Clark River, Clatsop County, Oregon. Atlas map 82, 84.Palm leaf, straw, or wood, split into thin pieces for making hats.Not typical of the conical style of native hats, but like the one mentioned in Clark's second entry of November 21, 1805.Including Willard, Labiche, Shannon, and probably Colter. See Lewis's entry for this 
day.Besides the entry for this day, see Lewis's and Clark's entries for December 29, 1805, and January 29, 1806, for descriptions of and notes on the native hats.According to Lewis, the hunters were Collins, Willard, Labiche, and Shannon. "Collins" may be an error for Colter; see Lewis's entry.According to Lewis, the hunters were Collins, Willard, Labiche, and Shannon. "Collins" may be an error for Colter; see Lewis's entry.