November 18, 1803LewisNovr. 18th
Set out early this morning with a canoe and eight men in company with Capt. Clark to visit and view the ground on which Oald Fort Jefferson stood; the river run from the point of junction S. 80 E. to the point of an island about 4 miles distant; at this or oposite to it found six Shawano [Shawnee] hunting camps; the Island is formed by a byo [bayou] which makes out nearly in the direction observed course of the river, the river turning more to the S., this byo runs about 2 ¾ approaching the highland very nearly in one point, and [after] receieving the waters of Mayfield creek emptys itself  again into the missippi, the lower mouth of this byo affords much the best navigation to the mouth of the creek, it is at the junction of this creek & byo that fort Jefferson stands on a rising ground, North of a Byo & West of the creek—    on our return landed on the spanish side <most fortunately> in order to take the course of the bank of the river on that side, in accomplishing this object we reached the huts of some persons who had established themselves for the purpose of trading with the Indians; found a number of our men who had left camp contrary to instructions & drunk, had much dificulty in geten

George Rogers Clark, older brother of William, established Fort Jefferson in 1780, naming it for Thomas Jefferson, then governor of Virginia; it was abandoned the next year. It stood a few miles below present Wickliffe, Ballard County, Kentucky, just above Mayfield Creek, the dividing line between Ballard and Carlisle counties. Quaife (MLJO), 50 n. 1; Thwaites (EWT), 4:280 and n. 184. Atlas map 6 appears to show the fort, but a tear on the sheet makes this uncertain.Since Lewis's entry for November 18 seems to end abruptly and the only material for November 19 consists of astronomical observations, it is difficult to determine the campsite locations for those days. The party remained in the vicinity of the Ohio-Mississippi junction, but there is no indication of what movements they made in the interim. Since the mooring they left on the twentieth was on the Ohio River side of the point between the two rivers, it is probable that the camp of the previous night (November 19–20) was in Alexander County, Illinois, in the vicinity of Cairo. Whether the camp of November 18–19 was in the same place, or on the "Spanish side" in Mississippi County, Missouri, or elsewhere, is not at all clear. Clark's map of the area in his Field Notes (fig. 1) shows a symbol on the Missouri shore which might be intended as a drawing of a tent; however, since it is also the point from which bearings were taken, it may signify no more than that.