August 29, 1806ClarkFriday 29th August 1806
a cloudy morning    the hunters proceeded on agreeable to their orders of last night. I Sent out two men to the village of barking Squirels with direcitions to kill Some of them.    they after 2 hours returned and informed me that not one of those Squirels were to be Seen out of their holes.    the Skins of the party which they had been dressing Since yesterday being now <nearly> completely dressed I derected all loose baggage to be put on board the Canoes and at 10 A. M. Set out and proceeded on    passed the white river at 12 oClock and halted below the enterance of Shannons Creek where we were joined by LabeechShannon and Willard, they had killed 2 common der but no Mule deer or antilopes. Willard informed me that he Saw 2 antilopes but Could not get near to them. Willard and Labiech waded white river a fiew miles above its enterance and inform me that they found it 2 feet water and 200 yards wide. the water of this river at this time nearly as white as milk.    put Drewyer out to hunt on the S W. Side and proceeded on below the round Island and landed on the N. E. Side    I with Several of the men went out in pursute of Buffalow.    the men killed 2 Bulls near me they were very por    I assended to the high Country and from an eminance, I had a view of the plains for a great distance.    from this eminance I had a view of a greater number of buffalow than I had ever Seen before at one time. I must have Seen near 20,000 of those animals feeding on this plain. I have observed that in the country between the nations which are at war with each other the greatest numbers of wild animals are to be found—    on my return to the river I killed 2 young deer.    after Dinner <I> we proceeded down the river about 3 mile to the Camp of Jo. & Rubin fields and Collins, and encamped on the S W. Side a little below our encampment of 13th Septr. 1804, haveing made 20 Miles only.    neither of the hunters killed either a Black tail deer or an antilope. Jo Fields & Shields each killed a porcupin and two others of the hunters Killed Deer, Drewyer did not join us untill 10 P. M.    he informed that he Saw some antilopes and Mule deer but Could kill none of them. Jo. Field informed that he wounded female of the Mule deer a little below our Camp late in the evening and could not prosue her I directed him to Set out with 3 others and follow the Deer and get her if possible early in the morning.
Ordway
Friday 29th August 1806.    a little rain. Several hunters went on with Small canoes to hunt.    about 10 A. M. we Set out and procd. on    passed the hunters.    one of them had killed a deer.    we Still procd. on    about 3 P. M. we halted and killed Several buffaloe and deer, and procd. on untill evening and Camped on S. Side    our hunters came up    had killed Several more buffaloe & deer.    we Save all the buffaloe horns we can find to take to the States as they would make excelent kife and fork handles &C &C.—


GassFriday 29th.    The morning was cloudy and some hunters went on ahead early; while we amused ourselves till 10 o'clock gathering plumbs, of which there is great abundance at this place. We then went on, and passed White
river on the south side. The Missouri here is very full of sand bars and shoals, and we find difficulty in getting along. About 2 o'clock we halted to kill some buffaloe, but were unsuccessful, and we proceeded, till evening, and encamped.


White River, joining the Missouri River in Lyman County, South Dakota, first passed on September 15, 1804. Atlas maps 20, 21, 22; MRC map 36.Present Ball or Bull Creek, in Lyman County, at whose mouth they camped on September 14, 1804. Atlas maps 20, 21, 22; MRC map 36.Evidently later Dry Island, in Brule County, South Dakota, first passed on September 14, 1804. Atlas maps 20, 21, 22; MRC map 36.This camp was in Lyman County, a little below the Round Island and the camp of September 13, 1804. Mattes (FR), 512; Atlas maps 20, 21, 22; MRC map 36.On the previous day Clark mentions giving orders to Shannon, Collins, Labiche, Willard, and Reubin Field to set out in the morning.Probably the wild plum, Prunus americana Marsh.