October 9, 1805Clark
Octo. 9th    all day drying our roots good & articles which got wet in the Canoe last night.    our 2 SnakeIndian guides left us without our knowledge, The Indians troublesom    Stole my Spoon which they returned. men merry at night & Singular acts of a Ind. woman
ClarkOctober 9th <Tuesday> Wednesday 1805 
The morning Cool as usial the greater part of the day proved to be Cloudy, which was unfavourable for drying our things &c. which got we[t] yesterday. In examoning our canoe found that by putting Knees & Strong peces pines [NB: pieces primed] [EC: pinned] to her Sides and bottom &c. She Could be made fit for Service in by the time the goods dried, Set 4 men to work at her, Serjt. Pryor & Gass, Jo Fields & Gibson, others to Collect rosin, at 1 oClock She was finished Stronger than ever    The wet articles not Sufficiently dried to pack up obliged us to delay another night dureing the time one man was tradeing for fish for our voyage, at Dark we were informed that our old guide & his Son had left us and had been Seen running up the river Several miles above, we Could not account for the Cause of his leaveing us at this time, without receiving his pay for the Services he had rendered us, or letting us know anything of his intention.
we requested the Chief to Send a horseman after our old guide to come back and recive his pay &c. which he advised us not to do as his nation would take his things from him before he passed their camps—. The Indians and our party were very mery this after noon    a woman faind madness &c. &c. Singular acts of this woman in giveing in Small potions all She had & if they were not received [NB: or She had no more to give—    pitied by Indians—    She Sang] She would Scarrify her Self in a horid manner &c.Capt Lewis recovring fast.
Ordway 
Wednesday 9th Oct. 1805.    a fair morning, and warm.    we delayed to Repair the canoe and dry the baggage &C.    the natives brought fresh Sammon and trade with us.    the River hills Still continue high and broken on each Side. Some Scatering pine timber &C.    the natives are very troublesome to us    two Sentinels placed to keep them from Stealing from us.    as the baggage was exposed.    we got the canoe repaired in the evening we bought a considerable quantity of Sammon, a little commass roots.    in the evening Some of our party fiddled and danced, which pleased the natives verry much.    one of their women was taken with fit by one of our fires. She began Singing Indian and to giving all around hir Some commass roots, and brasslets which hung about hir    one of our party refused to take them from hir. She then appeared angry threw them in the fire.    took a Sharp flint from hir husband and cut both of hir arms in Sundry places So that the blood gushed out. She Scraped the blood in hir hand and Eat it, and So continued <for> in this way about half an hour then fainted or went in to a fit Some time then came too by their puting water on hir and Seemed to take great care of hir &C—

GassWednesday 9th.    We stayed here during the whole of this day, which was very pleasant, and repaired our canoe. In the evening we got her completed and all the baggage dry. Here our old Snakeguide deserted and took his son with him. I suspect he was afraid of being cast away passing the rapids. At dark one of the squaws who keep about us, took a crazy fit, and cut her arms from the wrists to the shoulders, with a flint; and the natives had great trouble and difficulty in getting her pacified. We have some Frenchmen, who prefer dog-flesh to fish; and they here got two or three dogs from the Indians. All the country around is high prairie, or open plains.


WhitehouseWednesday 9th Oct. 1805.    a fair morning.    we were obledged to delay and prepare or repair the canoe which got Stove last evening, put the loading marchandize &c out to dry.    the natives brought us some fresh Sammon.    the River hills are high and continue barron on each Side.    a fiew Scattering pines along the Shores.    but fiew creeks puts in.    the natives hang about us, as though they wished to Steal or pilfer Something from us So we had to keep 2 Sentinels to watch the Marchandize &c.    we got the canoe repaired and loaded.    our officers tryed to purchase a fat horse for us to eat but the Natives did not bring him as they promised.    in the evening we purchased a considerable quantity of Sammon, a little bears oil or greese, Some root bread 2 dogs &c.    after dark we played the fiddle and danced a little.    the 
natives were pleased to see us.    one of their women was taken with the crazey fit by our fire.    She Set to Singing Indian and gave all around hir Some roots, and all She offered had to take from hir.    one of our men refused to take them from hir.    She then was angry and hove them in the fire, and took a Sharp flint from hir husband and cut hir arms in Sundry places So that the blood gushed out.    She wiped up the blood and eat it.    then tore off Some beeds and peaces of copper &c which hung about hir and gave out to them that were round hir a little to each one.    Still kept hir Singing and makeing a hishing noise.    She then ran around went to the water    Some of her kindred went after hir and brought hir back    She then fell in to a fit and continued Stiff and Speechless Some time    they pored water on hir face untill She came too.    Capt. Clark gave hir Some Small things which pleased hir—    <we came>
Wednesday October 9th    A pleasant morning, We delayed at the place we encamped at last night, in order to repair the Canoe which got Stove last evening.—    We put the loading that was on board that Canoe, which consisted chiefly of Merchandise out to dry.    The Natives came to our Camp, and brought us some fresh Salmon, which we purchased from them.    The River hills are high at this place, are barren, and a few scattering Pine Trees 
grow along the Shore, on each side of the River, and but few creeks are to be seen emptying into the River at this place.    The Natives appear'd round our Camp the most part of this day, & had every appearance of wishing to pilfer or steal from us, Our officers placed 2 Centinels to watch the Merchandise, & other articles that were laid out to dry, We caulked the Canoe that was stove, & repaired her, the Men then put the load on board of it—    Our officers endeavoured to purchase a fat horse from the Indians at our Camp, for the party to eat, but they did not bring the horse after promising to do so.    In the evening we purchased from them a considerable quantity of Salmon, a small quantity of Bears Oil, some Root bread & two dogs.    After it was dark some of the party began to play on a Violin and the others fell to a dancing, This pleased the Natives very much, & they seemed delighted at our manner of dancing, These Natives continued at our Camp all Night & one of the Women that were among them was taken with a Crazy fit.    This Woman began with singing in the Indian language, and then gave all that was round her some roots, & all those who she offer'd them to, had to take them.    One of our Men refused taking them from her, at which she grew Angry, and hove them in the fire, and took from her husband who stood near her, a sharp flint stone, and cut her Arms in many places, that the blood gushed out of them, she catched the blood & eat it, She then tore off some beads & pieces of Copper than hung about her neck, & gave all those round her, some of them; she still kept singing, & would at times make a hissing 
noise.    She then ran round the whole of them, & went towards the River.    her Relations followed her, & brought her back; when she fell into a fit, & remain'd Stiff & Speechless for some considerable time.—    The Natives threw Water on her, & brought her too, & then gave her some small Articles at which she seemed much pleased—


What the captains regarded as madness the Indians would probably have considered the prompting of a guardian spirit. Ronda (LCAI), 162.Toby.