August 10, 1804ClarkAugust 10thCourse Distance and remarks 10th of August 1804 Friday.N. 60°  W.  2ms. to a pt. of Sand makeing from the L. pointS. 80°  W.     ½me. on the to a Drift wood. This place is calledCoupe a Jarcke    a palce where the river cut
through and shortend the River Sevl. mls.South 18°  E,  2 ½ms. to Som Snags near some Willows on the S. S.
passd. the High <land> wood on L. S. in this Co's
at 1 meS. 20°  W.  2 ½ms. to a <Black> Burnt Stump on the Bank in the
bend to L. S. at which place I was yesterday    at
this place within ¾ of a mile & round the bends
13 ms.West  3 ½ms. to two Cotton wood trees at the Mouth of a
Small Creek in a bend to the L. S.    near the high
land a <Bluff> clift &c 1 me. above.N. 40°  W.  1 ½ms. to a Clift of yellow Sant Stone on the L. S.
this is the first high land which touches the river
above Councel Bluff, (this Clift is one mile only[)]N. 52°  W.  1 ½ms. to the pt. of a Saand barr from the S. point
passed the Clift. on L. S.N. 79°  E  3ms. to a pt. of Small willows on the L. S. passing
the high timber on S S. at 1 me    wind hard from
the S. W.N. 29 E     ½of a mile on the L. point, the boat run on a log &
detained us 10 minitsNorth  1 ½me. to the Pt. of a Sand bar makeing out from
the L. point.N 68°  W.     ¾mes. on the L. point    a Sand bar makeing out
from this Course.N. 85°  W.  2 ½Ms. to the Lower point of a willow island off the
S. point—    Black bird the late King of the Mahars
Toom or inclosed grave on the top of a high
round Hill of about 300 feet in the Prarie L. S.
bore west about 4 miles.    (Musquters bad)22 ¼Clark10th August Friday 1804
		  	
Set out early this morning. CourseN. 60°  W. about  2miles to a Sand makeing out from the Larboard point.S. 80 W.     ½me. to a Drift log on the Sand    This place is CalledCoupee as Jacke    the river laterly Cut through Saveing
Sevl. mes.S. 18°  E  2 ½ms. to a burnt Stump in a bend to the L. S.    this place
I was at yesterday.S. 20°  W.  2 ½ms to a <Black> Burnt Stump on the Bank in the bend
to L. S. at which place I was yesterday   	at this place
within ¾ of a mile & round the bends 13 msWest  3 ½ms. to 2 Cotton wood trees at the mouth of a run on
the L. S. near the high land & below a Bluff.N. 40°  W.  1 ½to a clift of yellow Sand Stone the first high land touch-
ing the river above the Council Bluff.N. 52°  W.  1 ½ms. to the pt. of a Sand bar from the Starboard pt.
passed the Clift L. S.N. 79°  E.  3ms. to a pt. of willows on the L. S.N. 29 E.     ½me. on the L. pt.North  1½ms. to a Sand bar from the L. pt.N. 68 W.     ¾mes. on the Sand bar from L. Pt.N. 85 W.  2 ½ms. to the lower pt. of a willow island near the S.
point    from this Island the high hill which the Late
King of the Mahars was buried on is high and bears
West 4 miles—    we camped on this Island.    Mis-
quitors verry trouble some.    much Elk & Beaver Sign 22 ¼ OrdwayFriday 10th    we Set off eairly    a fair day. Some fish & one Beaver caught last night.    we passed a place where the River had cut through & Shortened the river Several miles, we passed high Ridge of prarie land on S. S. Smooth plains back from the river, the Timber Scarse, a Great nomber of Elk Sign on the Sand beaches &.C.    we passed high clifts on S. S. about 60 feet from the Surface of the of Sand Stone.    the ridge on the top is covered with Short Grass Some bushes &.C.    the wind hard from the S. W.    (Sailed Some.)    we came 22½ miles this day & camped on a Sand bar N. S. of the Missouri River.
Floyd	
<Set out errley ouer this morning>    Friday augt the 10th    Set out at errley ouer this morning    prosed on    passed a bad Sand bare which is verry Shallow    made 23 miles    Camped. on a sand bare on the N. Side    the Land on the S. S. is High Hilley Land
GassFriday 10th.    We embarked early, passed high yellow banks on the south side, and encamped on the north.

Whitehouse	
Friday 10    the morning was Clear    the musquitoes was mighty troublesome Untill The Sun rose to Some hight.    Campd. On the E. S.    Roaed 24 mils
Friday August 10th    We set out early this morning.    We found the Musketoes very troublesome untill the Sun rose to some heighth, when they quitted us, the wind being fair we Sail'd the greatest part of this day.    We encamped in the Evening on the North side of the River having rowed & sail'd 24 Miles.—


The courses and distances appear to be the only entry for August 10, 1804, in the Field Notes. The similar brevity of the Codex A entry for this day suggests that Clark had little time or energy left at the end of the day. A figure near the course heading appears to be 19¾.Coupée à Jacques means simply "Jacques's Cut." Part of it apparently forms present Blue Lake, at Lewis and Clark State Park, Monona County, Iowa. Atlas map 15; McDermott (WCS), 150; Osgood (FN), 103 n. 8; MRC map 26; MRR map 72.Two quarries along the valley and bluffs near Fort Calhoun, Nebraska, have been excavated in limestones of Pennsylvania age, but no sandstone is reported in them. The Dakota sandstone (Cretaceous) has not been reported in this area. The hill is immediately north of Decatur, Burt County, Nebraska, and appears prominently in Nicollet. Atlas map 15; Nicollet (MMR), 391; MRC map 26; MRR map 72.See Atlas map 15. They visited this landmark the next day.In Monona County, considerably east of the Missouri River's present course and, as Clark indicates, east or southeast of Blackbird Hill. Atlas map 15; MRC map 26; MRR map 72.In Monona County, Iowa, across the river and a few miles above the Thurston-Burt
county line in Nebraska.Again written over "South."