June 19, 1804ClarkJune 19th Tuesday    raind last night    Arranged everry thing and Set out 8 oCk    wind in favor from the S. E.Course
N. 87° W3Ms. to up. pt of a Isd. on [S. S.? blot]S. 80° W.1 ½pt. L. Sd.    psd. up pt. Isd. on S. S.—    hard water.S. 70° W1 ½me. along the L. S., high rich BottomS. 58° W 4 ½pt. S. S.    Passed an Isd. Close on the L. S. & 3 Sand barsS. 68 W3Ms. pt S. S.    pass Tabbo Creek 15 yds. wide on L S. opsd. a
Small Isd.    we passed thro between 2 Isds. by Clearing away
Drift wood, passed the Lower pt. of the Isd. of Pant[h]ers
S. S. formed by a narrow ChannelS. 83° W.4ms.    Plenty of Goose & Rasp buries on the banks, passed a
verry bad point of rocks of ½ a mile    oblige to Draw the
Boat up by a rope, Camped opposit a Lake at 2 ms. distant
on the L. S.    this lake is large and is a place of great resort
for Deer and fowls of everry Kind    the bottom low & cov-
ered with rushesClarkJune 19th Tuesday
rain last night    after fixing the new Oars and makeing all necessary arrangements, we Set out under a jentle breese from the S. E. and proceeded on    passed two large Islands on the S. S. leaving J. Shields and one man to go by land with the horses    Some verry hard water, passed Several Islands & Sand bars to day    at the head of one we were obliged to cleare away Driftwood to pass, passed a Creek on the L. Side Called <Tabboe> [NB: Tabo] 15 yds. wide    passed a large Creek at the head of an Island Called Tiger River [NB: 25 yds] on the S. S. The Island below this <river> Isd. is large and Called the Isle Of Pant[h]ers, formed on the S. S. by a narrow Channel, I observed on the Shore Goose & Rasp berries in abundance    in passing Some hard water round a Point of rocks on the L. S. we were obliged to take out the roape & Draw up the Boat for ½ a mile, we Came too on the L. S. near a Lake of the Sircumfrance of Several miles Situated on the L. S. about two miles from the river    this Lake is Said to abound in all kinds of fowls, great quanties of Deer frequent this Lake dureing Summer Season, and feed on the hows [haws] &c. &c. they find on the edgers    the Lands on the North Side of the river is rich and Sufficiently high to afford Settlements, the Lds. on the South Side assends Gradually from the river    not So rich, but of a good quallity and appear well wateredCourse & Distance June 19thN. 87° W,3ms. to upr pt. of an IslandS. 80° W1 ½ms. to a pt. L. Side    psd 4 wil. Isds.S. 70° W1 ½ms. along the L. S.—S. 58° W4 ½ms. to a pt. S. S.    psd. a Isd. S. S.S 68 W3ms. to pt. S. S.    psd. Tabbo CreekS 83 W4ms. to pt. L. S.    Campd. 1 me. 17 ½ Ordway
Tuesday June 19th 1804.    we Set out at 9 o.C. with a fair wind.    we
passed a beautiful large prarie on the North Side, high Rich Bottom on South Side    we passed Tabbo Creek on South Side    we Saw pleanty of goos Berries & Ras Berries on the banks, we passed a bad place of Rocks.    the water So Swift that we were obledged to hole the Boat by a Rope, we Camped on South Side opposite a pond, which was near to where we camped    The Musquetoes are verry troublesome.    we Got Musquetoes bears from Capt Lewis to sleep in,

Floyd
Tusday June 19th    Set out at 8 oclock    day Clouday    wind from the Est    Sailed past a Creek on the South Side Calleded tabor Creek    it is about 40 yards wide and Clear water below    High Hills Good Land well timberd    past Several Isds    Strong water    Came 13 miles    encamped on the South Side of the River    ouer hunters Did not Return Last night


GassTuesday 19th.    We passed Tabo creek on the south side, and a small creek on the north and encamped on the south side opposite a small lake about two miles distant.


Whitehouse	
Tusday 19    Got on Our way at the Roap walk Camp perarie    the day was Clear    a Sharp wind Arose    Saild. 12 Miles    Campd. at neer the River Taboe, it Running N. E. the Breadth of it at the Mouth is 50 Yds. at the Mouth
Tuesday June 19    This morning we started early, from the Rope walk camp Priari, the weather being fine & clear, about 9 oClock A. M. a good Brees sprung up from the South East, We set sail, and in the evening encamped near the River Taboe, This River runs North East to its head the breadth of it at its Mouth is 50 Yards, The distance we rowed and Sailed this day being 12 Miles.—

"Rushes" refers to Equisetum sp., scouring rush, horsetail. This is probably the common horsetail, E. arvense L. Steyermark, 11.In the neighborhood of what was later called Baltimore Bar. MRC map 12.Whitehouse reveals that the other man was John Collins.Tabo Creek, in Lafayette County, Missouri, perhaps named for Pierre-Antoine Tabeau, a fur trader whom the captains would meet among the Arikaras on October 10, 1804. It is Nicollet's "Tabeau River." McDermott (WCS), 148; Nicollet (MMR), 364; MRC map 12.The Tiger River and Island of Panthers are named for the cougar, or mountain lion, Felis concolor. The creek may be Crooked River in Ray County, Missouri. However, it appears that they did not actually pass it until the next day; see below, June 20, 1804. Hall, 2:1039–43; MRC map 12.Gooseberries are a species of Ribes, here possibly Missouri gooseberries.In Lafayette County, a few miles east of present Lexington. The lake appears as Nicollet's "Marais de [Apakwa?]," a few miles east of present Lexington. The point passed just before they camped may have been what was later called Sheep Nose. Nicollet (MMR), 364; MRC map 12.Probably one or more of the many species of Crataegus, hawthorn, red haw, known to occur in the area. These are C. crus-galli L., cockspur thorn; C. mollis (T. & G.) Scheele, summer haw, turkey apple; and C. calpodendron (Ehrh.) Medic., urn-trees. Less probably Viburnum prunifolium L., black haw, or V. rufidulum Raf., southern black haw. Steyermark, 810–22, 1414–15.Perhaps Missouri gooseberry, Ribes missouriense Nutt., and black raspberry, Rubus occidentalis L.A few miles below Lexington, Lafayette County.Probably Aedes vexans.A bier or mosquito netting.Not mentioned by any other journal keeper; perhaps a very minor nameless watercourse in Carroll County, Missouri, nearly opposite Tabo Creek. The lake was a few miles east of Lexington, Lafayette County.