June 22, 1806LewisSunday June 22nd 1806.
this morning by light all hands who could hunt were sent out; the result of this days perfomance was greater than we had even hoped for.    we killed eight deer and three bear.    we dispatched Whitehouse to the Kooskooske near our old encampment above Collins's Creek in order to procure some Salmon which we have understood the natives are now taking in considerable quantities near that place.    we gave Whitehouse a few beads which Capt. C. had unexpectedly found in one of his waistcoat pockets to purchase the fish.    nothing further worthy of notice occurred in the course of this day.    the last evening was cool but the day was remarkably pleasent with a fine breize from the N. W.    neither DrewyerShannon nor Whitehouse returned this evening.— Potts's legg is inflamed and very painfull to him.    we apply a poltice of the roots of Cows.—ClarkSunday June 22nd 1806
This morning by light all hands who Could hunt were Sent out, the result of the days performance was greater than we had even hopes for.    we killed eight Deer and three Bear.    we despatched whitehouse to the Kooskooke near our old encampment above Collins Creek in order to precure Some Salmon which we understood the nativs are now takeing in considerable quantities near that place.    we gave whitehouse a fiew beeds which I unexpectedly found in one of my waistcoat pockets to purchase the fish.    nothing further occured in the Course of this day.    the last evening was Cool but the day was remarkably pleasant with a fine breeze from the N. W.    neither ShannonDrewyer nor whitehouse returned this evening.— Potts legg is inflamed and very painfull to him. we apply a poltice of the root of Cowes.—.
Ordway
Sunday 22nd June 1806.    clear and pleasant.    all the hunters turned out eairly this morning a hunting around this Commass flat.    one man Set out to go over to the kooskooskee river for Salmon as the 2 Indians told us they catch pleanty at this time.    about noon all the hunters came in    had killed in all eight deer and two brown bear.    towards evening the hunters turned out again and Collins killed a black bear.

GassSunday 22nd.    We had a pleasant day. The two hunters went out early and the Indians remained with me at the camp. At noon the hunters came in, but had killed nothing but one small pheasant. In the evening they made another excursion, but were unsuccessful.



Camp Chopunnish.Here Lewis found another use for cous. Cutright (LCPN), 284.Again, some type of grouse.