September 14, 1806ClarkSunday 14th Sept. 1806
Set out early and proceeded on very well.    this being the part of the Missouri the Kanzas nation resort to at this Season of the year for the purpose of robbing the perogues passing up to other nations above, we have every reason to expect to meet with them, and agreeably to their Common Custom of examining every thing in the perogues and takeing what they want out of them, it is probable they may wish to take those liberties with us, which we are deturmined not to allow of and for the Smallest insult we Shall fire on them.    at 2 P. M. a little below the lower of the old Kanzas Village we met three large boats bound to the Yanktons and Mahars the property of Mr. Lacroy, Mr. Aiten & Mr. Coutau all from St. Louis, those young men received us with great friendship and pressed on us Some whisky for our men, Bisquet, Pork and Onions, & part of their Stores, we continued near 2 hours with those boats, makeing every enquirey into the state of our friends and Country &c.    those men were much affraid of meeting with the Kanzas.    we Saw 37 Deer on the banks and in the river to Day 5 of which we killed those deer were Meager.    we proceeded on to an Island near the middle of the river below our encampment of the 1st of July 1804 and encamped haveing decended only 53 miles to day.    our party received a dram and Sung Songs untill 11 oClock at night in the greatest harmoney.
Ordway
Sunday 14th Sept. 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set as usal and procd. on    Soon passed the old village of the Kansers.    Some of the hunters killd. Several deer from their Canoes    about 3 oClock P. M. we discovred three keel Boats Sailing up the river.    we put to Shore    Spread our flags    they Sailed up to us and halted with us a Short time    they were tradors from St. Louis and frenchman but could Some of them Speak English.    they are bound for the Mahars nations.    they gave us ardent Spirits buiscuits and cheese &C. onion    we then procd. on    Gibson Shot an other deer from his canoe    at dark we Camped on N. Side.—


GassSunday 14th.    In a fine morning we proceeded on early and went very well, until 3 o'clock when we met three large batteaux loaded with merchandize, going up to different nations of Indians for the purpose of trade. The people in them were very glad to see us, and gave us some whiskey, pork, and biscuit. We remained with them two hours and again went on. We killed five deer on the bank to day, as we floated down: and saw a fine young horse. At sun set, we encamped on a small island.



For the Kansa, or Kaw, Indians, see June 5, 1804. "The Kanzas" is written over some other word.Probably the village noted on July 2, 1804, in northeast Leavenworth County, Kansas. They are now near present Fort Leavenworth. MRC map 16.This may be Charles Courtin, first referred to on September 15, 1804. He traded with the Teton Sioux, the Arikaras, and the Poncas, and is believed to have reached the Three Forks of the Missouri and to have been killed in western Montana in 1809. Osgood (FN), 136 n. 6; Josephy, 660–63; Jackson (LLC), 2:437 n. 3.Gibson shot one from a canoe, according to Ordway.The camp of July 1, 1804, was on Leavenworth Island, opposite present Leavenworth, Kansas. MRC map 15.Clark indicates they were led by "Mr. Lacroy, Mr. Aiten & Mr. Coutau," the last perhaps Charles Courtin.