September 6, 1806ClarkSaturday 6th of September 1806
The Musquetors excessively troublesom    we Set out early at the great Cut off Saw a herd of Elk, we landed and Sent out Several hunters to kill Some of the Elk, they returnd. without killing any as the Elk was wild and ran off much fritened. I Sent the two Small Canoes on a head with derections to hunt in two bottoms below, and after a delay of half an hour proceeded on wind-hard a head at the lower point 7 of Pelecan Island a little above the Petite River de Seeoux we met a tradeing boat of Mr. Ag. Choteaux of St Louis bound to the River Jacque to trade with the Yanktons, this boat was in Care of a Mr. Henry Delorn, he had exposed all his loading [NB: to dry] and Sent out five of his hands to hunt they Soon arived with an Elk.    we purchased a gallon of whiskey of this man [NB: promised to pay Choteau who would not receive any pay] and gave to each man of the party a dram which is the first Spiritious licquor which had been tasted by any of them Since the 4 of July 1805. Several of the party exchanged leather for linen Shirts and beaver for Corse hats. Those men Could inform us nothing more than that all the troops had movd. from the Illinois and that Genl. Wilkinson was prepareing to leave St. Louis. We advised this trader to treat the Tetons with as much Contempt as possible and Stated to him where he would be benefited by such treatment &c &c. and at 1 P. M Set out    those men gave us 2 Shots from a Swivell they had on the bow of their boat which we returned in our turn.    proceeded on about 3 miles and Came up with two of the hunters, they had not killd. any thing.    at 5 miles we over took the Canoe of the other hunters with Shannon in it floating down, the two fields being in the woods behind we Came too on a Sand bar on the N. E. Side and delayed all the after part of the [day?] for the two Fields, Sent out 3 men to hunt in the bottom up the river and observe if they Saw any Sign of the hunters.    the evening proved Cloudy and the wind blew hard    two pelicans were killed to day.    we came 30 Miles only to day    the 2 fieldses did not join us  I think they are below. The Chief & the Squaws & children are awarey of their journey. Children cry &c.
Ordway
Saturday 6th Sept. 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on    about noon Saw a large flock of pillicans    Some of the hunters killed three of them    Shortly after we met a batteaux manned with 12 frenchman a canoe in compy    this keel Boat belonged to Mr. Shoetoe of St. Louis and is under charge of a frenchman and are going up to the yanktons at a wintering house below white stone river    they gave us a little whiskey. I traded for a hat and Shirt by giveing them beaver Skins.    our officers purswaded them not to trade with the Tetons nation    we delayed about 2 hours and procd. on. Some of the hunters Stayed back to hunt and did not join us this evening. Camped.—

GassSaturday 6th.    We set out early, in a fine morning; saw a number of pelicans, and about 8 o'clock a gang of elk, when some hunters went out, but returned without killing any. At 11 o'clock we met a barge belonging to a Mr. Shotto, of St. Louis, loaded with merchandize, for the purpose of trading with the Sioux nation of Indians. We got some spirituous liquors from this party the first we had tasted since the 4th of July 1805, and remained with them about three hours; sent some hunter a head, and proceeded on till about three o'clock in the afternoon, when we halted, and waited for the hunters at the place agreed on to meet them, but they did not come in, and we encamped for the night.


This large cut-off of the Missouri River in Monona County, Iowa, first noticed on August 8, 1804, appears conspicuously on Atlas map 15. MRC map 25.The Little Sioux River in Harrison County, Iowa, first passed on August 8, 1804. Atlas map 14; MRC map 25.René Auguste Chouteau; see December 11, 1803.Perhaps a relative of David Delaunay; see May 20, 1804. Conceivably the Joseph, or Pierre, Delaunay who was later an overland Astorian, or Jean Baptiste Delorme, another Astorian. Lavender (FW), 168–69; Irving (Astor), 273; Ronda (AE), 90, 177, 279. On the other hand, he may have been a member of the De Laurier family which was prominent in early Ste. Genevieve and vicinity. Houck, 1:343, 2:2, 90. Thwaites (LC), 5:378, has "Delorn," but "Delorie" or "Deloree" seem equally valid versions of Clark's script.The camp would be in Harrison County, or in Burt or Washington County, Nebraska, between Little Sioux and Soldier rivers. Atlas map 14; MRC map 25.