February 22, 1806LewisSaturday February 22cd 1806.
We were visited today by two Clatsop women and two boys who brought a parsel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark and ornamented with beargrass.    two of these hats had been made by measures which Capt Clark and myself had given one of the women some time since with a request to make each of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we desired them.    we purchased all their hats and distributed them among the party.    the woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as these hats and their waterproof baskets evince an ingenuity by no means common among the Aborigenes of America.    in the evening they returned to their village and Drewyer accompanied them in their canoe in order to get the dogs which the Clatsops have agreed to give us in payment for the Elk they stole from us some weeks since.    these women informed us that the small fish began to run which we suppose to be herring from their discription.    they also informed us that their Chief, Conia or Comowooll, had gone up the Columbia to the valley in order to purchase wappetoe, a part of which he in tended trading with us on his return.    one of our canoes brake the cord by which it was attatched and was going off with the tide this evening; we sent Sergt. Pryor and a party after her who recovered and brought her back.    our sick consisting of Gibson, Bratton, Sergt. Ordway, Willard and McNeal are all on the recovery.    we have not had as may sick at any one time since we left Wood River.    the general complaint seams to be bad colds and fevers, something I beleive of the influenza.
The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the same of those on the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered country.    they are by no means as plenty on this side of the Rocky Mountains as on the other.    the natives here make robes of their skins dressed with the hair on them.    when the salmon begin to decline in the latter end of the sunme and Autumn the natves leave the river, at least a majority and remove to the plains at some distance for the purpose of hunting the Antelope.    they pursue them on horse back and shoot them with their arrows. The sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky mountains, but most commonly in those parts which are timbered and steep. they are also found in greater abundance on the Chain of mountains wich form the commencement of the woody country on this coast and which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids    we have never met with this anamal ourselves but have seen many of their skins in possession of the natives dressed with the wooll on them and also seen the blankets which they manufacture of the wooll of this sheep.    from the skin the animal appears to be about the size of the common sheep; of a white colour.    the wooll is fine on most parts of the body but not so long as that of our domestic sheep.    the wooll is also curled and thick.    on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the wooll is intermixed with a considerable proportion of long streight hairs.    there is no wooll on a small part of the body behind the sholders on each side of the brisquit which is covered with a short fine hairs as in the domestic sheep. form the signs which the Indians make in discribing this animal they have herect pointed horns, tho' one of our Engages La Page, assures us that he saw them in the black hills where the little Missouri passes them, and that they were in every rispect like the domestic sheep, and like them the males had lunated horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting with this animal, but have had too many proofs to admit a doubt of it's existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains near this coast.    the Beaver and common Otter have before been mentioned in treating of the occupations of the natives in hunting fishing &c.    these do not differ from those of other parts of the Continent.—
ClarkSaturday February 22nd 1806
We were visited to day by two Clatsops women and two boys who brought a parcel of excellent hats made of Cedar bark, and ornemented with bear grass.    two of those hats had been made by measure which Capt Lewis and my Self had given a woman Some time Since, with a request to make each of us a hat; they fit us very well, and are in the form we desired them.    we purchased the hats and distribeted them among the party.    the woodwork and sculpture of these people as well as those hats and the water proof baskits evince an ingenuity by no means common among the Aborigenes of America.    in the evining they returned to their village and Drewyer accompanied them in order to get Some dogs &c. These women informed us that the Small fish began to run which we suppose to be herring from their discription.    they also informed us that their Chief ConiaComawool, had gorn up the Columbia to the Vally in order to purchase Wappatoe, a part of which he entended tradeing with us on his return.    our sick consisting of Gibson, Bratten, WillardMcNeal and BaptiestLaPage is Something better    Serjt. Ordway is complaining of a Coald & head ake.    we have not had as many Sick at one time Since we left the Settlements of the Illinois.    the general Complaint appears to be bad colds and fevers, with a violent pain in the head, and back, something I believe of the influenza.
The Antelope is found in the great plains of Columbia and are the Same with those of the Missouri found in every part of that untimbered Country.    they are by no means as plenty on this Side of the Rocky Mountains as on the other.    the nativs here make robes of their Skins dressed withe the hair on them.    when the Salmon begin to decline in the latter end of Summer and autumn, the nativs leave the river, at least a majority and move out into the plains at Some distance for the purpose of hunting the Antelope.    they pursue them on hors back and Shute them with their arrows.
The Sheep is found in various parts of the Rocky Mountains, but most Comonly on those parts which are timbered and Steep.    they are also found in greater abundance on the chain of mountains which forms the Commencement of the woody country on this coast and which pass the Columbia between the great falls and rapids.    we have never met with this animal ourselves but have Seen maney of their Skins in the possession of the nativs dressed with the wool on them and also Seen and have the blankets which they manufacture of the wool of this Sheep.    from the Skin the animal appears to be about the Size of the common Sheep; of a white colour.    the wool is fine on most parts of the body, but not so long as thaht of the domestic Sheep; the wool is also Curled and thick.    on the back and more particularly on the top of the neck the wool is intermixed with a Considerable proportion of long Streight hair.    there is no wool on a Small part of the body behind the Sholders on each Side of the brisquit which is covered with a Short fine hairs as in the domestic Sheep. from the Signs which the Indians make in discribing this animale they have herect pointed horns, tho' one of our Engages Lapage, assures us that he Saw them in the Black hills where the Little Missouri river passes them, and that they were in every respect like our domestic Sheep, and like them the mail had lunated horns bent backwards and twisted. I should be much pleased at meeting with this animal.    but have had too maney proofs to admit a doubt of it's existing and in considerable numbers in the mountains on this Coast. The Beaver and Common Otter have before been mentioned in treating of the Occupation of the nativs in hunting, fishing, &c.    these do not differ from those of other parts of the Continent—.—.

Ordway
Saturday 22nd Feby. 1806.    a fair morning. George Gibson Some better. I am full of pains but not verry Sick.    the rest of the Sick are mending a little. Several of the natives came to the Fort with some of their Split a[nd] chip hats which are Engeaneously made. Drewyer went to the village &C.

GassSaturday 22nd.    This was a fine clear day; and some of the natives again visited us, and brought some hats, which we purchased at a moderate price. The 23rd was also clear and pleasant; but the morning of the 24th was cloudy, and at 10 o'clock it began to rain hard. About noon a number of the natives came to the fort to trade. The rain continued with high stormy wind; and we suffered the Indians to remain in the fort all night.


Whitehouse
Saturday Febry 22nd    We had a pleasant morning but cool, the Men that were Sick in the Fort, were all getting better.    Several Indians of the Clatsop Nation came to the fort in Canoes.    They brought with them Split & Straw or Grass hatts for sale.    they make those kind of hatts by platting them very ingeniously & they <are> were truly handsome.—    Towards Evening they left the fort, and one of our Hunters (George Drewyer) accompanied them.    Some of our Men in the fort were employed in making Cloathing &ca.


Two vertical lines run through much of this passage about pronghorn and mountain goat, perhaps Biddle's doing.The mountain goat, which the captains never observed at close range. Clark believed he saw one at a distance on August 24, 1805.Coboway was among them.