May 17, 1804Clark
Thursday the 17th 1804    a fine Day    3 men Confined for misconduct, I had a Court martial & punishment    Several Indians, who informed me that the Saukees [Sauks] had lately Crossed to war against the Osage Nation    Som aplicasions, I took equal altitudes    made the m a. to be 84° 39' 15"A M8 H3540P M32324""3750""2450"" 820""2550
measured the Missouries at this place and made it 720 yards wide, in Banks.    a Boat came up this evening, I punished Hall agreeable to his Sentence in part, a fine after noon; Suped with Mr. Ducett an agreeable man more agreeable Lady, this Gentleman has a Delightful Situation & garden.
ClarkMay the 17th Thursday 1804
a fair day    Compelled to punish for misconduct. Several Kickapoos Indians Visit me to day, George Drewyer arrive. Took equal altitudes of Suns L L made is 84° 39' 15" ap T. h'" h'"A. M.83540P M32324"83750"32450 83820"32550        
Measured the river    found it to be 720 yards wide, a Keel Boat Came up to day—    Several of the inhabitents Came abord to day    receved Several Speces of Vegatables from the inhabitents to day
OrdwayOrdersSt. CharlesThursdy the 17th of May 1804—

a Sergeant and four men of the Party destined for the Missourri Expidition will convene at 11 oClock to day on the quarter Deck of the Boat, and form themselves into a Court martial to hear and determine (in behalf of the Capt.) the evidences aduced against William Warner & Hugh Hall for being absent last night without leave; contrary to orders;—& John Collins 1st for being absent without leave—    2nd for behaveing in an unbecomeing manner at the Ball last night—    3rdly for Speaking in a language last night after his return tending to bring into disrespect the orders of the Commanding officer Signd. W. Clark Comdg.
Detail for Court martial
 Segt. John Ordway Prs.
 
membersR. FieldsR. WindsorJ. WhitehouseJo. Potts
The Court convened agreeable to orders on the 17th of May 1804 Sgt. John Ordway P. membersJoseph WhitehouseRueben FieldsPottsRichard Windsor
after being duly Sworn the Court proceded to the trial of William Warner & Hugh Hall on the following Charges Viz: for being absent without leave last night contrary to orders, to this Charge the Prisoners plead Guilty. The Court one of oppinion that the Prionsers Warner & Hall are Both Guilty of being absent from camp without leave it being a breach of the Rules and articles of war and do Sentence them Each to receive twenty-five lashes on their naked back, but the Court recommend them from their former Good conduct, to the mercy of the commanding officer.—    at the Same court was tried John Collins Charged 1st for being absent without leave—    2d. for behaveing in an unbecomming manner at the ball last night    3dly for Speaking in a languguage after his return to camp tending to bring into disrespect the orders of the Commanding officer—    The Prisoner Pleads Guilty to the first Charge but not Guilty to the two last chrges.—    after mature deliberation & agreeable to the evidence aduced. The Court are of oppinion that the Prisnair is Guilty of all the charges alledged against him it being a breach of the rules & articles of War and do Sentence him to receive fifty lashes on his naked back—    The Commanding officer approves of the proceedings & Desicon of the Court martial and orders that the punishment of John Collins take place this evening at Sun Set in the Presence of the Party.—    The punishment ordered to be inflicted on William Warner & Hugh Hall, is remitted under the assurence arriveing from a confidence which the Commanding officer has of the Sincerity of the recommendation from the Court.—    after the punishment, WarnerHall & Collins will return to their squads and Duty—
The Court is Disolved Sign. Wm. ClarkOrdway
Thursday May 17th 1804, a fair day, but Rainy night, nothing occured worthy of notice this day

Floyd
Thursday may 17th 1804    a fair but Rainey Night



Whitehouse
Thursday 17th May 1804.    a pleasant morning.    we are waiting here the arival of Capt. Lewis.    the evening rainy.
Thursday May 17th    A pleasant morning.    We are still here waiting the arrival of Captain Lewis; in the Evening we had some Rain.—

Perhaps applications to join the expedition.Probably a mistake; the court-martial record below says that Hall and Werner were to be granted leniency and only Collins was to be punished. None of the enlisted men's journals mention the affair.The order and court-martial record in the Orderly Book, including the signatures, are in Ordway's hand.