September 9, 1806ClarkTuesday 9th September 1806
Set out early at 8 A. M    passed the enterance of the great river Platt which is at this time low the water nearly clear the Current turbelant as usial; the Sand bars which Choked up the Missouri and Confined the [river?] to a narrow Snagey Chanel are wastd a way and nothing remains but a fiew Small remains of the bear [bar] which is covered with drift wood, below the R. Platt the Current of the Missouri becomes evidently more rapid than above and the Snags much more noumerous and bad to pass    late in the evening we arived at the Bald pated prarie and encamped imediately opposit our encampment of the 16th and 17th of July 1804.    haveing made 73 miles only to day. The river bottoms are extencive rich and Covered with tall large timber, and the hollows of the reveins may be Said to be covered with timber Such as Oake ash Elm and Some walnut & hickory.    our party appears extreamly anxious to get on, and every day appears produce new anxieties in them to get to their Country and friends. My worthy friend Cap Lewis has entirely recovered his wounds are heeled up and he Can walk and even run nearly as well as ever he Could.    the parts are yet tender &c. &.
The Musquetors are yet troublesom, tho' not So much So as they were above the River platt.    the Climate is every day preceptably wormer and air more Sultery than I have experienced for a long time.    the nights are now So worm that I sleep Comfortable under a thin blanket, a fiew days past 2 was not more than Sufficient
Ordway
Tuesday 9th Sept. 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set out eairly and procd. on. Soon passed the mouth of River platte and procd. on verry well all day without making any delay.    having made 74 miles this day. Camped on South Side opposite bald pated prarie    the musquetoes Scarse &C.


GassTuesday 9th.    We embarked early and in a short time passed the mouth of the great river Platte; went on very well all day, and at night encamped on a small sand beach opposite the Bald-pated prairie.


They first reached the Platte, which mouths between Cass and Sarpy counties in Nebraska, on July 21, 1804. MRC map 22.Clark first noted the bald-pated prairie, in Fremont County, Iowa, and Atchison County, Missouri, on July 16, 1804. MRC map 21.The camp would be in Nemaha County, Nebraska, or Atchison County, Missouri, northeast of Peru, Nebraska. MRC map 21; MRR map 58.The tall and large timber of the bottoms is primarily plains cottonwood and sycamore, Platanus occidentalis L. Two common species of hickory, bitternut hickory, Carya cordiformis (Wang.) K. Koch, and shagbark hickory, C. ovata (Mill.) K. Koch, are associated with bur oak, green ash, American elm, and black walnut in the sheltered ravines as described. Barkley, 32, 36–37; Little (CIH), 147-E. Clark provides a description of the Missouri River vegetation of this general area in his entry for July 30, 1804.Clark has it seventy-three.