September 16, 1806ClarkTuesday 16th September 1806
we Set out early this morning and proceded on tolerably well    the Day proved excessively worm and disagreeable, So much So that the men rowed but little, at 10 A M we met a large tradeing perogue bound for the Panias we continued but a Short time with them.    at 11 A. M we met young Mr. Bobidoux with a large boat of six ores and 2 Canoes, the licenes of this young man was to trade with the PaniasMahars and ottoes reather an extroadanary a license for [so] young a man and without the Seal of the teritory anexed, as Genl. Wilkensons Signeture was not to this instrement we were Somewhat doubtfull of it. Mr. Browns Signeture we were not acquainted with without the Teritorial Seal.    we made Some enquireys of this young man and Cautioned him against prosueing the Steps of his brother in attempting to degrade the American Charector in the eyes of the Indians.    we proceeded on to an Island a little above our encampment of the 16th & 17th of June 1804 haveing Came 52 miles only to day.Ordway
Tuesday 16th Sept 1806.    a fair morning.    we procd. on as usal    Soon met eight frenchman with a perogue loaded with marchandize and bound for the Panies Nation on River platte.    about noon we met a keel Boat and 2 canoes    the keel Boat belonged to Mr. Reubado of St Louis loaded with
marchandize and bound for the Kanzas Nation of Indians.    this boat was under the charge of Mr Reubados Son.    the 2 Canoes were going up trapping and hunting    we delayed about an hour.    their was about 20 frenchman in Company.    our officers gave instructions to this trador after reading his passport directing them not to speak against the government of the United States to the Indians as his brothers did to the Zotoes last winter.    we then procd. on    the day verry warm indeed.    about 3 P. M. we passd a hunting Camp of two frenchman    they came out to us with their canoe to us    they informed us that an american Boat was on their way coming up Some distance below this.    we procd. on untill evening and Camped on the N. Side. Saw a black bear which run a thicket of bushes.


GassTuesday 16th.    This was another pleasant day. We proceeded on early, and at 9 o'clock met a large periogue with eight men, going to trade with the Ponis nation of Indians on the river Platte about seventy or eighty miles from its mouth. At 11 we met a batteaux and two canoes going up to the Kanowas nation, who live on a river of the same name. We halted with them a while, then proceeded on, and at sunset encamped on an island.


Ordway and Gass both say that this party was bound to trade with the Kansa Indians. Several members of the Robidoux family of Saint Louis, over several generations, were leaders in the fur trade. Joseph Robidoux, probably the young man the party met here, had established a trading post at the site of St. Joseph, Missouri, in 1800 and is regarded as the founder of that city. His license to trade had apparently been issued by the territorial secretary, Joseph Browne, in the absence of the governor, General Wilkinson. Lewis, in an "Essay on an Indian Policy," later expressed further suspicions that the Robidoux family were fomenting disloyalty to the United States among the Indians, but Clark evidently changed his mind about them, since he granted trading licenses to them as superintendent of Indian affairs. Joseph Robidoux later operated his St. Joseph post for the American Fur Company and continued to play an important role in the western fur trade for many years. Mattes (JR); Lavender (FW), 78; Coues (HLC), 3:1236 and n. 7, 1243.The camp of June 16, 1804, was in Carroll County, Missouri, nearly opposite the present town of Waverly. The June 17 camp was about a mile above this. The island where they now camped would be between Carroll and Lafayette counties, a few miles up the Missouri from Waverly. MRC map 12.Ordway says they were going to trade with the Kansa Indians.Kansa Indians.