April 21, 1806LewisMonday April 21st 1806.
Notwithstanding all the precautions I had taken with rispect to the horses one of them had broken his cord of 5 strands of Elkskin and had gone off spanseled. I sent several men in surch of the horse with orders to return at 10 A. M. with or without the horse being determined to remain no longer with these villains.    they stole another tomahawk from us this morning I surched many of them but could not find it. I ordered all the spare poles, paddles and the ballance of our canoe put on the fire as the morning was cold and also that not a particle should be left for the benefit of the indians. I detected a fellow in stealing an iron socket of a canoe pole and gave him several severe blows and mad the men kick him out of camp. I now informed the indians that I would shoot the first of them that attempted to steal an article from us.    that we were not affraid to fight them, that I had it in my power at that moment to kill them all and set fire to their houses, but it was not my wish to treat them with severity provided they would let my property alone.    that I would take their horses if I could find out the persons who had stolen the tommahawks, but that I had reather loose the property altogether than take the hose of an inosent person.    the chiefs were present hung their heads and said nothing.    at 9 A. M. Windsor returned with the lost horse, the others who were in surch of the horse soon after returned also.    the Indian who promised to accompany me as far as the Chopunnish country produced me two horses one of which he politely gave me the liberty of packing.    we took breakfast and departed a few minutes after 10 OClock. having nine horses loaded and one which Bratton rode not being able as yet to march; the two canoes I had dispatched early this morning.    at 1 P. M. I arrived at the Enesher Village where I found Capt Clark and party; he had not purchased a single horse.    he informed me that these people were quite as unfriendly as their neighbours the Skillutes, and that he had subsisted since he left me on a couple of platters of pounded roots and fish which an old man had the politeness to offer him.    his party fared much better on dogs which he purchased from those people.    the man resided here from whom I had purchased the horse which ran off from me yesterday. I had given him a large kettle and a knife in exchange for that horse which I informed him should be taken from him unles he produced me the lost horse or one of equal value in his stead, the latter he prefered and produced me a very good horse which I very cheerfully received.    we soon made the portage with our canoes and baggage and halted about ½ a mile above the Village where we graized our horses and took dinner on some dogs which we purchased of these people.    after dinner we proceeded on about four miles to a village of 9 mat lodges of the Enesher a little below the entrance of Clark's river [NB: Towanahiooks] and encamped; one of the canoes joined us the other not observing us halt continued on.    we obtained two dogs and a small quantity of fuel of these people for which we were obliged to give a higher price than usual.    our guide continued with us, he appears to be an honest sincere fellow.    he tells us that the indians a little above will treat us with much more hospitality than those we are now with.    we purchased another horse this evening but his back is in such a horid state that we can put but little on him; we obtained him for a trifle, at least for articles which might be procured in the U' States for 10 shillings Virga Cory.—    we took the precaution of piquting and spanseling our horses this evening near our camp.—
ClarkApril 21st 1806
a fair Cold morning. I find it useless to offer any articles or attempt to trade at this village and therefore determine to [blank]    before I rose the house was Crouded with Indians to Smoke I gave them none.    they are well Supplied with Straw & bark bags ready to hold their pounded fish.    at 12 oClock the advance of the party from below arived and Soon after the Canoes    all things were taken above the falls & 2 Canoes, turned out the horss and Cooked & Eat 2 dogs which we purchased of the nativs, purchased one horse for Which we are to give a Kittle which was given by us to a man for a horse 3 days past &c.    the horse was either taken or Strayed off. The Chief from below Came up and appeared Concerned for what had been done at his Village (See Journal)
a 4 P M loaded up & Set out    the Cnoes also proceed on about 3 miles opposit to the Mouth of Clarks river, and an Indian man who has attached himself to us and who has lent us a horse to pack & lies near the Rocky mountains.    he told us that as the day was far Spent we had better Camp at a village of 9 Lodges a little off the road opsd. the River C— Clarks    This river has a great falls above 2 forks on its West Side.    we formed a Camp    purchased Some wood & 3 dogs for which we gave pewter buttons which buttons we had made &c.    but fiew Indians with us <to day> this evining    purchased an old horse and tied up all the horses when we went to bed
Those are the Same people with those below at the falls. See Journal for the next day—
Skad dat a ill looking people reside to the N about 18 or 20 miles    they played against the Skillutes a game they Call [blank]    9 of a Side and lost all the beeds & other articles
also a Single game with 2 black & 2 white Sticks under a kind of hat.    2 men played this game    is intricit and each party has 4 pegs to count it
The former game is played with 2 bones or Sticks about the Size of a large quill and 2 inches long passing from one hand to the other and the adverse party guess. See description before mentioned. The nations abov at the falls also play this game and bet high
ClarkMonday 21st April 1806
A fair Cold morning    I found it useless to make any further attempts to trade horses with those unfriendly people who only Crouded about me to view and make their remarks and Smoke, the latter I did not indulge them with to day.    at 12 oClock Capt Lewis and party Came up from the Skillutes Village with 9 horses packed and one which bratten who was yet too weak to walk, rode, and Soon after the two Small Canoes also loaded with the residue of the baggage which Could not be taken on horses.    we had everry thing imedeately taken above the falls, in the mean time purchased 2 Dogs on which the party dined—    whilst I remained at the Enesher Village I Subsisted on 2 platters of roots, Some pounded fish and Sun flour Seed pounded which an old man had the politeness to give me.    in return for which I gave him Several Small articles—.Capt Lewis informed me that imedeately after I left him the nativs began to Steal and had Stolen Tomahawks of the party, and in the Course of the night had let <their> our horses loose    he had burnt one and Sold 2 of the largest Canoes for beeds, the other 2 brought on.    an indian was detected in Stealing a socket and was kicked out of Camp. Capt L. informed the Indians that the next man who attempted to steal Should be Shot and thretened them and informed them that he could kill them in a moment and Set their town on fire if he pleased.    but it was not his desire to hurt them Severly if they would let the property of the party alone.    the Chiefs hung their heads and Said nothing.    he lost the horse that was given for a large kittle, and a Chopunnish man lent a horse to carry a load and accompanied the party—    The man who we had reason to believe had Stolen the horse he had given for the Kittle we thretened a little and he produced a very good horse in the place of that one which we Chearfully receved.
after dinner we proceeded on about 4 Miles to a Village of 9 Mat Lodges of the Enesher, a little below the enterance of To war nah hi ooks river and encamped:    one of the Canoes joined us, the other not haveing observed us halt continued on. We obtained 2 Dogs and a Small quantity of fuel of those people for which we were obliged to give a higher price than usial.    our guide continued with us, he appears to be an honest fellow.    he tels us that the indians above will treat us with much more hospitallity than those we are now with.    we purchased another horse this evening but his back is in Such a horrid State that we Can put but little on him; we obtained him for a triffle, at least for articles which might be precured in the U. States for 10/—virga. Currency—    we took the precaution of picqueting and Spancelling our horses this evening near our Camp.    the evening Cold and we Could afford only one fire.

Ordway
Monday 21st of April 1806.    a clear cold morning.    one of our horses broke away last night    we found him after hunting a while this morning we make ready to depart from this place as the Indians are verry troublesome to us    have stole 5 or 6 tommahawks Iron Spoons &C &C.    we loaded our horses 9 in number.    4 men took 2 small canoes by water.    we Set out about 8 oClock and proceed on    about noon arived at the village below the big falls.    joined Capt. Clark who had not purchased any horses.    we bought 2 dogs.    the Indians returned us a horses in liew of one of those we lost &C.    we carryed the canoes past the portage and mooved all above the
portage and dined and proced. on the N. Side to a village opposite the mouth of Clarks River where we Camped as the road leaves the river at this place    we bought 3 dogs and a little wood to cook with    one of the canoes Stayed on the opposite Side


GassMonday 21st.    This was another pleasant morning with some white frost. We found the horse, which had broke away last night, and made preparations for setting out from this place. While we were making preparations to start, an Indian stole some iron articles from among the men's hands; which so irritated Captain Lewis, that he struck him; which was the first act of the kind, that had happened during the expedition. The Indians however did not resent it, otherwise it is probable we would have had a skirmish with them. This morning we disposed of two canoes and used another for firewood. At 10 o'clock we set out from the first narrows, with nine of our own and one we borrowed, and two canoes all loaded heavy. I went with three other men in the canoes, and had some difficulty in passing the short narrows. About 3 in the afternoon we arrived at the great falls of Columbia, where we met with Captain Clarke and the men that were with him. Here we got another horse; carried our canoes and baggage round the falls and halted for dinner. We also got some dogs here, and shapaleel, which we subsist on chiefly at present. We halted here two hours and then proceeded on again. The party that went by land had to leave the river, and take out to the hill a part of the way. I crossed with my canoe to the south side, where there is the best water, and passed a large rock island, opposite to which the Sho-sho-ne river flows in from the south. We went on till dark, and then run our small canoe among some willows, and laid down to sleep. We did not make any fire for fear the savages, who are very numerous along this part of the river, might come and rob us.



Hobbled with rope.In Klickitat County, Washington, roughly opposite the lower end of Miller Island and a little below the mouth of Deschute (Clark's Towanahiooks) River, opposite. Atlas maps 77, 78. On fig. 21, the camp is misdated "23d of April 1806."Virginia currency.The First Draft Voorhis fragment ends with this entry.A reference to the Voorhis No. 3 entry for this day.Clark refers to the Voorhis No. 3 entry for April 22, 1806, which contradicts the statement in the previous sentence about the Indians.Celilo Falls, Great Falls on Atlas maps 77, 78, between Klickitat County, and Wasco County, Oregon.The captains eventually came to call "Clark's River" by another name, "Towanahiooks." It is today's Deschutes River, forming a line between Wasco and Sherman counties, Oregon, on its lower course. The party camped on the opposite side in Klickitat County, Washington.Lewis says the Indian stole the iron socket off a canoe pole and admits giving him "several severe blows."Horses.Miller Island.The Deschutes River, Wasco County, Oregon. Gass's name refers to the "Snake" (Paiute) Indians living on the river, whom he supposes to be the same as the Shoshones (Snakes) the party encountered in Idaho.Somewhere above Deschutes River, on the Oregon side of the Columbia.