September 21, 1806ClarkSunday 21st Septr. 1806
rose early this morning    Colected our men    Several of them had axcepted of the invitation of the Citizens and visited their families.    at half after 7 A. M we Set out.    passed 12 canoes of Kickapoos assending on a hunting expedition. Saw Several persons also Stock of different kind on the bank which reviv'd the party very much.    at 3 P M we met two large boats assending.    at 4 P M we arived in Sight of St. Charles, the party rejoiced at the Sight of this hospital village plyed thear ores with great dexterity and we Soon arived opposit the Town, this day being Sunday we observed a number of Gentlemen and ladies walking on the bank, we Saluted the Village by three rounds from our blunderbuts and the Small arms of the party, and landed near the lower part of the town.    we were met by great numbers of the inhabitants, we found them excessively polite.    we received invitations from Several of those Gentlemen a Mr. Proulx,Taboe,Decett,Tice Dejonah & Quarie and several who were pressing on us to go to their houses, we could only visit Mr. Proulx and Mr. Deucett in the course of the evening. Mr. Querie under took to Supply our party with provisions &c.    the inhabitants of this village appear much delighted at our return and seem to vie with each other in their politeness to us all.    we Came only 48 miles today.    the banks of the river thinly Settled &c.    [NB: some Settlements since we went up]
Ordway
Sunday 21st Sept. 1806.    we Set out as at the usal time and procd. on    passed the Scattering houses along the Shores.    met a great number of Indians in canoes mooving up the River.    the people of the Settlements were makeing inqueries of us & were Surprized to See us as they Said we had been
given out for dead above a year ago.    towards evening we arived at St. Charles fired three rounds and Camped at the lower end of the Town.    the people of the Town gathered on the bank and could hardly believe that it was us for they had heard and had believed that we were all dead and were forgotton.    the most of the paty got quarters in Town and refreshments.    late in the evening hard rain commend. and continued hard during the night.

Lewis apparently began a letter to Jefferson this day which he did not complete. Possibly it was misdated, since the dateline reads "St. Louis," but the poor hand suggests it was written in a boat. Lewis to Jefferson, September 21, 1806, Jackson (LLC), 1:317–19.The captains had encountered Kickapoos in Illinois and Missouri at various times before the start of the expedition and in its early stages. See March 21, May 5, 17, and 22, 1804.The party first arrived in St. Charles, in St. Charles County, Missouri, on May 16, 1804. MRC map 2.Basil Proulx was an early inhabitant of St. Charles. Thwaites (LC), 5:392 n. 1.This could be Pierre-Antoine Tabeau, whom the captains first met at the Arikara villages on October 9, 1804. There were other Tabeaus in Missouri, however, and Tibeau, Thibault, and Tabot were other surnames to be found in the region. Houck, 2:68–69.Clark first met François Duquette on May 16, 1804.