July 26, 1804ClarkWhit Cat fish Camp 26th of July Thursday.    the wind blew Verry hard all Day from the South with Clouds of Sand which incomoded me verry much in my tent, and as I could not Draw in the Boat was obliged Combat with the Misqutr. under a Shade in the woods—.    I opened the Breast of a man    the discharge gave him ease &c.    5 beaver Caught near Camp— only 1 Deer Killed to day.    The Countrey back from Camp on the S. S. is a bottom of about 5 ms. wide    one half the Distn. timber, the other high bottom Prarie, the opsd. Side a high Hill about 170 foot rock foundatio. Timbered back & below.    a PrarieClarkCatfish which is White Camp
26th of July Thursday 1804    the wind blustering and hard from the South all day which blowed the Clouds of Sand in Such a manner that I could not complete my pan [X: plan] in the tent, the Boat roled in Such a manner that I could do nothing in that, I was Compessed to go to the woods and Combat with the Musqutors, I opened the Tumer of a man on the left breast, which discharged half a point. [pint?]
five Beever Cough[t] near this Camp the flesh of which we made use of—    This evening we found verry pleasent—    only one Deer Killed to day. The Countrey back from Camp on the S. S. is a bottom of about five mile wide, one half the distance wood & the ball. [balance?] plain high & Dry.    the opposed Side a high Hill about 170 foot <rock foundation> [NB: rock foundation], Covd. with timber, back & below is a Plain.LewisThursday July 26th
Observed Equal Altitudes of ☉ with Sextant.h    m    sh    m    sA. M.7    33    32P. M.4    15    24"    34    55"    16    51"    36    22"    18    14

Altitude by Sextant at the time of Obst. 62° 18' 15" 
Ordway

Thursday July 26th 1804.    pleasant morning    Some men out hunting. G. Drewyer killed 2 Deer & one Turkey.    the Party Generally bussey dressing Skins &C—    all the latter part of the day the wind blew hard from the S.    a nomber of beaver has been caught here Since we arived at this place    they appear to be verry pleanty on this River.
Floyd

<Thuresday July 27th    we Set out at 12 oclock P. M    prossed on under a Jentil Brees from the S. E. sited>    Thursday July 26th    ouer men fineshed the oares    nothing worth Relating except the wind was verry villant from the South Est—

Whitehouse
Thursday July 26th 1804.    pleasant morning    Some men out hunting.    G. Drewyer killed 2 Deer & 1 Turkey,—    the later part of the day the [wind] hard from the South    a Great many Beaver caught at this place by the party.—
Thursday July 26th    This morning, we had pleasant weather, one of our hunters went out hunting, & returned; having kill'd & brought in with him 2 Deer & one Turkey, the latter part of the day, the Wind blew hard from the South, our people went out to hunt beaver, and caught near this place a large number of them.—He opened the boil or abscess on the man's chest to let it drain.The American beaver, Castor canadensis, was already a familiar species. Hall, 2:601–5.The note, "(27)" comes at the end of this entry, perhaps as a guide to the next date.Lewis's observation from Codex O.