September 2, 1806ClarkTuesday 2nd of September 1806
Set out at the usial hour    passed the River Jacque at 8 A. M.    in the first bottom below on the N E. Side    I observed the remains of a house which had been built since we passed up, this most probably was McClellins tradeing house with the Yanktons in the Winter of 1804 & 5. the wind was hard a head & continued to increas which obliged us to lay by nearly all day.    as our Store of meat, I took with me 8 men and prosued a Small gang of Cows in the plains 3 miles and killed two which was in very good order, had them butchered and each man took a load as much as he Could Carry and returned to the Canoes, the wind Still high and water rough we did not Set out untill near Sun Set    we proceded to a Sand bar a Short distance below the place we had Come too on account of the wind and Encamped <the> on a Sand bar, the woods being the harbor of the Musquetors and the party without the means of Screaning themselves from those tormenting insects.    on the Sand bars the wind which generaly blows moderately at night blows off those pests and we Sleep Soundly. The wind Continued to blow hard from the Same point S. E untill 3 P. M  I saw in my walk to day Lynn and Slipery Elm.    the plains are tolerably leavel on each Side and very fertile. I saw 4 prarie fowls Common to the Illinois, those are the highest up which have been Seen, white Oak is very Common also white ash on the riveens and high bottoms.    two turkys killed to day of which the Indians very much admired being the first which they ever Saw. Capt L. is mending fast—    we made only 22 Miles to day.
Ordway
Tuesday 2nd Sept 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set out eairly and procd. on    passed the mouth of River Jaque.    Saw gangs of Elk    got Some good pipe clay    about 11 A. M. the wind rose So high a head that it detained us untill towards evening.    the hunters killed two buffaloe and 2 Turkeys    The Musquetoes So troublesome that we mooved down a Short distance and Camped on a Sand beach for the night.—


GassTuesday 2nd.    We had a fine morning, but high wind; set out early, and went on till noon, when we halted, and some men went out and killed two fine fat buffaloe cows; and brought in the best of the meat. The musketoes are very troublesome. We again started and went on about two miles, when the wind blew so violent that we had to encamp for the night, on a large sand-bar, where the musketoes are not so bad, as where there are woods or bushes.


The James River, first passed on August 27, 1804, meets the Missouri in Yankton County, South Dakota. Atlas map 18; MRC map 30; MRR maps 82, 83.For Robert McClellan see September 12, 1806. The trading house would have been in Yankton, a little below the mouth of the James River. Atlas map 18; MRC map 30.They camped a few miles below the mouth of the James River; it is not really clear whether this was in Yankton County, South Dakota, or in Cedar County, Nebraska. Atlas map 18; MRC map 30.American linden, Tilia americana L., and slippery elm, Ulmus rubra Muhl. This observation of the linden and elm together is significant since the trees reach their distributional limit on the Missouri River in this area. Barkley, 87, 33; Little (CIH), 193-E, 198-E.The greater prairie-chicken. In fact, its range extends north to southern Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Burroughs, 211.Bur oak, Quercus macrocarpa Michx., belongs to the large taxonomic group of white oak species. True white oak, Q. alba L., occurs farther down the Missouri River. Clark did not distinguish between the two species even though the acorn is significantly different. Apparently, he was using the general name to identify the oak from a distance. Barkley, 38–39.Green ash, Fraximus pennsylvanica Marsh. var. subintegerrima (Vahl) Fern., is the species noted here. White ash, F. americana L., is not found this far north. Again, Clark may have sighted the tree from a distance since the leaves of the two species are distinguishable. Barkley, 298–99; Little (CIH), 130-E, 126-E.The James River, first passed on August 27, 1804, meets the Missouri in Yankton County, South Dakota.