November 25, 1805ClarkNovember 25th Munday 1805
a fine day    Several Indians Come up from below, we loaded and Set out up the river, and proceeded on to the Shallow Bay, landed to dine, The Swells too high to cross the river, agreeabley to our wish which is to examine if the game Can be precured Sufficent for us to winter on that Side, ater dinner which was on Drid pounded fish we proceeded on up on the North Side to near the place of our Encampment of the 7th Instant and encamped after night    The evening cloudy wind of to day Generally from the E S. E, Saw from near of last Campment Mount Ranier bearing [blank]
ClarkMonday 25th November 1805
The Wind being high rendered it impossible for us to Cross the river from our Camp, we deturmind to proceed on up where it was narrow, we Set out early accompanied by 7 Clât Sops for a fiew miles, they left us and Crossed the river through emence high waves; we Dined in the Shallow Bay on Dried pounded fish, after which we proceeded on near the North Side of the Columbia, and encamp a little after night near our Encampment of the 7th instant near a rock at Some distance in the river.    evening Cloudy the Winds of to day is generally E. S. E which was a verry favourable point for us as the highlands kept it from us    Mt. St. Hilians Can be Seen from the mouth of this river.
Ordway
Monday 25th Nov. 1805.    a clear pleasant morning.    we put the canoes in the River loaded up.    our officers bought two more Sea otter Skins of the natives.    we then Set out and Came about 9 miles up the River and attempted to cross over to the opposite Shore but the waves So high that the canoes were near filling. So we turned back to Shore again and kept along the Shore about 4 miles above Shallow bay and Camped.—GassMonday 25th.    The morning was pleasant, though cloudy, with a white frost. We loaded our canoes, and proceeded on: went about 9 miles and made an attempt to cross the river, but failed; we therefore kept up the north 
side round Shallow-bay, and encamped about four miles above it.


Whitehouse
Monday Novemr. 25th    We had a clear pleasant morning.    Our Officers had concluded on crossing the River, & endeavor to find out a suitable place, for our Winter Quarters.    Our officers purchased from the Natives 2 more Sea Otter Skins.    We loaded our Canoes, and set off in order to go up the River, & to cross over the River where it was narrower.—    We proceeded on up the River about 9 Miles, where we attempted to cross it, but the Waves ran so high that we found it impracticable.    We kept on about 4 Miles farther & encamped.    The place we encamped at, was in the Wide part of the River which is called Shallow bay, from the Shoalness of the Water here.—    This place lay on the No side of the Columbia River.—



Grays Bay, in Wahkiakum County, Washington, as before.Near present Pillar Rock, in Wahkiakum County. The campsite is not marked on Atlas maps 82, 89, but the camp of November 7 is noted on both maps.Mt. Rainier, now in Mt. Rainier National Park in Pierce County, Washington, is the highest point in Washington. It was named for Admiral Peter Rainier of the British Navy by Vancouver in 1792. Anderson (SSGV), 85.Near the party's camp of November 7, opposite Pillar Rock, Wahkiakum County, Washington.Being unable to cross the Columbia, they went around Grays Bay and camped near Pillar Rock, Wahkiakum County, Washington.They went around Grays Bay and camped near Pillar Rock, Wahkiakum County, Washington.