August 22, 1806ClarkFriday 22nd August 1806.
rained all the last night    every person and all our bedding wet, the Morning cloudy, at 8 A M. I was requested to go to the Chiefs, I walkd up and he informed me that he Should not go down but would Stay and take Care of the village and prevent the young men from doing rong and Spoke much to the Same porpt of the Grey Eyes, the 2d Chief Spoke to the Same and all they Said was only a repitition of what they had Said before.    the Chief gave me some Soft Corn and the 2d Chief Some Tobacco Seed—    the Interpreter Garrow informed me that he had been Speeking to the Chiefs & warriers this morning and assured me that they had no intention of going down untill the return of the Cheif who went down last Spring was a year. I told the Cheifs to attend to what we had Said to them, that in a Short time they would find our words tru and Councils good.    they promised to attend Strictly to what had been Said to them, and observed that they must trade with the Sieoux one more time to get guns and powder; that they had no guns or powder and had more horses than they had use for, after they got guns and powder that they would never again have any thing to do with them &c. &c. I returned the Canoes & derected the men to prepare to Set out. Some Chyennes from two Lodges on the Main <N> S E. Shore Came and Smoked with me and at 11 A. M we Set out haveing parted with those people who appeared to be Sorry to part with us.    at this nation we found a french man by the name of Rokey who was one of our Engagees as high as the Mandans this man had Spend all his wages, and requested to return with us— we agreed to give him a passage down. I directed 2 guns to be fired.    we proceeded on    passed the Marapa and the We ter hoo Rivers, <to a> and landed to dry our bedding and robes &c which were all wet.    here we delayed untill 6 P M. and dryed our things which were much Spoiled.
I derected 5 of the hunters to proceed on to Grouse Island a fiew miles below and hunt on that island untill we arived, we proceded on to the main N E Shore below the Island and encamped, the hunters joined us without any thing.    they Saw no game on the island.    we made only 17 Mies to day.    below the ricaras the river widens and the Sand bars are emencely noumerous much less timber in the bottoms than above—.
The Chyenne's are portly Indians much the complections of the Mandans & ricaras high Cheeks, Streight limbed & high noses the men are large, their dress in Sumner is Simpelly a roab of a light buffalow Skin with or without the hair and a Breach clout & mockerson Some ware leagins and mockersons, their ornaments are but fiew and those are composed principally of Such articles as they precure from other indians Such as blue beeds, Shell, red paint rings of brass broaches &c.    they also ware Bears Claws about their necks, Strips of otter Skin (which they as well as the ricaras are excessively fond of) around their neck falling back behind.    their ears are cut at the lower part, but fiew of them were ornements in them, their hair is generally Cut in the forehead above their eyes and Small ornimented plats in front of each Sholder the remainder of the hair is either twisted in with horse <of> or buffalow hair divided into two plats over the Sholder or what is most common flow's back, Their women are homely, corse feetured wide mouthes they ware <on> Simpially a leathe habit made in a plain form of two pieces of equal length and equal weadth, which is sewen together with Sinues from the tail to about half way from the hip to the arm, a String fastens the 2 pieces together over the Sholders leaveng a flap or lapells which fall over near half way ther body both before and behind.    those dresses usially fall as low as mid leg, they are frequently ornemented with beeds and Shells & Elk tuskes of which <they> all Indians are very fond of.    those dresses are als frequently Printed <into> in various regular figures with hot sticks which are rubed on the leather with Such velosity as to nearly burn it this is very handsom.    they were their hair flowing and are excessively fond of ornimenting their ears with blue beeds—    this nation peacbly disposed they may be estimated at from 350 to 400 men inhabetig from 130 [120?] to 150 Lodges, they are rich in horses & Dogs, the dogs Carry a great preportion of their light baggage.    they Confess to be at war with no nation except the Sieoux with whome they have ever since their remembranc been on a difencive war, with the Bands of Sieoux.    as I was about to leave the Cheifs of the Chyennes lodge he requested me to Send Some traders to them, that their country was full of beaver and they would then be encouraged to Kill beaver, but now they had no use for them as they could get nothing for their skins and did not know well, how to catch beaver.    if the white people would come amongst them they would become acquainted <with them> and the white people would learn them how to take the beaver—. I promised the Nation that I would inform their Great father the President of the U States, and he would have them Supplied with goods, and mentioned in what manner they would be Supplied &c. &c.—
I am happy to have it in my power to Say that my worthy friend Capt Lewis is recovering fast, he walked a little to day for the first time. I have discontinud the tent in the hole the ball came out—
I have before mentioned that the MandansMaharhasMenetarras & Ricarras, keep their horses in the Lodge with themselves at night.

Ordway
Friday 22nd August 1806.    hard Thunder Showers all last night. I Slept in the village.    the Chiefs Say that they are all afraid to go down with us. About 10 A. M. cleared off fair and we Set out and procd. on a fiew miles and halted to dry our baggage and bedding &C.    we delayed about 3 hours and procd. on to the foot of prarie Islands and Camped on N. Side.



GassFriday 22nd.    There was a cloudy wet morning, after a night of hard rain, and we stayed at this village to 12 o'clock. The natives used us friendly, and with kindness; gave us corn and beans, with other articles; but one of them would go down with us. At noon we got under way; and having proceeded twelve miles the weather became clear, and we halted to dry our baggage, which we got very wet last night. At four o'clock we again went on, and had a fine passage till night when we encamped.


For Joseph Garreau, see October 8, 1804, March 16, 1805.Ordway refers to him in his entry of August 21, 1806; in Quaife (MLJO), 392, the name is given as "Ross," but in Ordway's manuscript it could easily be "Roie." This would be the engagéPeter (or Pierre) Roi, whose name Clark at least once (see July 4, 1804) spells "Roie." See Appendix A.The first stream is Rampart Creek, the second Grand River, both in Corson County, South Dakota; the party first passed these streams on October 8, 1804. Mattison (OR), 87–88; Atlas map 25; MRC map 45; MRY map 107.Grouse Island is later Blue Blanket Island, which the party passed on October 7, 1804. The camp was below the island in Walworth County, South Dakota, some six miles southeast of present Mobridge; the site would now be inundated by the Oahe Reservoir. Mattison (OR), 83–84; Atlas map 25; MRC map 45; MRY map 105.For the Cheyennes, see October 12, 1804.The words "Kill beaver" and the next use of the word "beaver" appear to be substitutions for erasures.In Walworth County, South Dakota, some six miles southeast of Mobridge. They had passed Grand River, in Corson County, during the day. Clark calls the island Grouse Island; it
is later Blue Blanket Island, which the party passed on October 7, 1804.