May 23, 1806LewisFriday May 23rd 1806.Segt. Pryor wounded a deer early this morning in a lick near camp; my dog pursud it into the river; the two young Indian men who had remained with us all night mounted their horses [one word erased; illegible] swam the river and drove the deer into the water again; Sergt. Pryor killed it as it reached the shore on this side, the indians returned as they had passed over.    we directed half this deer to be given to the indians, they immediately made a fire and cooked their meat, 4 others joined them from the village with the assistance of whom they consumed their portion of the spoil in less than 2 hours and took their leave of our camp. The Creem of tartar and sulpher operated several times on the child in the course of the last night, he is considerably better this morning, tho' the swelling of the neck has abated but little; we still apply polices of onions which we renew frequently in the course of the day and night.    at noon we were visited by 4 indians who informed us they cad come from their village on Lewis's river at the distance of two days ride in order to see us and obtain a little eyewater, Capt. C. washed their eyes and they set out on their return to their village.    our skill as phisicans and the virture of our medecines have <has> been spread it seems to a great distance. I sincerely wish it was in our power to give releif to these poor afficted wretches.    at 1 P. M. Shannon, Colter, Labuish, Cruzatte, Collins, and LaPage returned from hunting without having killed anything except a few pheasants of the dark brown kind, which they brought with them.— These hunters informed us that they had hunted the country deligently between the river and Creek for some distance above and below our camp and that there was no game to be found.    all the horses which have been castrated except my poor unfortunate horse appear as if they would do very well. I am convinced that those cut by the indians will get well much soonest and they do not swell nor appear to suffer as much as those cut in the common way.—
ClarkFriday 23rd May 1806
a fair morning.    Sergt. Pryor wounded a Deer at a lick near our Camp and our dog prosued it into the river.    two Indians which happened to be at our Camp Mounted their horses and Swam across the river chased the deer into the water again and pursued it across to the Side on which we were, and as the Deer Came out of the Water Sgt. Pryor killed it.    we derected half of this deer to be given to those two indians.    they imediately made a fire and Cooked the meat.    4 others joined them from the Village and they Soon consumed their portion. The Child is Something better this morning than it was last night.    we apply a fresh poltice of the wild Onion which we repeeted twice in the Course of the day.    the Swelling does not appear to increas any Since yesterday. The 4 Indians who visited us to day informed us that they Came from their village on Lewis's river two days ride from this place for the purpose of Seeing of us and getting a little eye water I washed their eyes with Some eyewater and they all left us at 2 P. M. and returned to the Villages on the opposit Side of this river.    at 1 oClock Shannon, Colter, Labiech, CrusattLapage and Collins all returned from hunting without haveing killed any thing except a fiew heath hens & black Pheasants two of which they brought with them. Labiech also brought a whisteling squerel which he had killed on it's hole in the high plains.    this squerel differs from those on the Missouri in their Colour, Size, food and the length tal and from those found near the falls of Columbia
Our hunters brought us a large hooting owl which differ from those of the atlantic States. The plumage of this owl is an uniform mixture of dark yellowish brown and white, in which the dark brown prodominates.    it's Colour may be properly termed a dark Iron gray.    the plumage is very long and remarkably Silky and Soft.    those have not the long feathers on the head which give it the appearance of ears, or horns, remarkable large eyes—.
the hunters informed us that they had hunted with great industry all the Country between the river and for Some distance above and below without the Smallest Chance of killing any game.    they inform us that the high lands are very cold with snow which has fallen for every day or night for Several past.    our horses which was Cut is like to doe well.

Ordway
Friday 23rd May 1806.    clear & pleasant. Sergt Pryor wounded a deer at a lick near our Camp    it Swam the river to the S. Side two Indians who Stayd with us last night Swam the river with their horses and ran the deer    it took the river and Swam back again. Sergt. pryor then killed it and gave the Indians one half of it who Swam their horses back after it. Wm bratton having been so long better than 3 months nearly helpless with a Severe pain in his back we now undertake Sweeting him nearly in the manner as the Indians do only cover the hole with blankits having bows bent over above the hole.    we expect this opperation will help him.    we continue burning out the canoe &C.    about noon our hunters all came in empty    had killed nothing except a fiew fowls    most of our men went to the village we were camped at
Some time past and bought considerable of couse & Shappalell &C. Some of the natives caught 3 Salmon to day.

GassFriday 23d.    We again had a fine morning.— One of our sergeants shot a deer at a lick close to our camp, and wounded it very bad, but it got to the 
river and swam over. Two young Indians who had been at our camp all night, then mounted their horses, swam over and drove it back; and we killed it and gave them half of it. The river is about two hundred yards wide and cold and rapid. In the afternoon, all the hunters came in but had killed nothing more.Lewis's last daily entry in Codex K. The remainder of the notebook is filled with weather tables for April and May 1806, pp. 147–52, reading backwards.Cream of tartar (potassium bitartrate) would operate as a diuretic and cathartic. Sulphur would only serve as a fungicide and insecticide. Cutright (LCPN), 285.Lewis mentions only the pheasants (blue grouse). Clark's "heath hens" may be the same bird or some other, unknown grouse.Columbian ground squirrel, Spermophilus columbianus, a new species. See Lewis's longer description at May 27, 1806. Burroughs, 99–101; Cutright (LCPN), 306, 445.The great gray owl, Strix nebulosa [AOU, 370], another new species. See Lewis's longer description at May 28, 1806. Burroughs, 209–10; Holmgren, 32.Pryor, say Lewis, Clark, and Ordway.Shannon, Colter, Labiche, Cruzatte, Collins, and Lepage. The captains say they had 
killed "a few pheasants of the dark brown kind," probably blue grouse.