September 12, 1804ClarkCourse Distance &c. 12 th of Septr. 1804.N. 45° W.4miles to a point of woods on the L. S.    passed an Isd Trouble-
som Island in the middle of the river    at the upper pt of this
Island the river was so crouded with Sand bars that we found
great dificulty in getting the boat over, she turned on the Sand
4 times and was verry near turning over.    we camped on the
L. S. near a village of Prarie Dogs
Some rain all day to day & Cold—
I walked on Shore    Saw Several foxes Several Villages of Prarie dogs, and a number of GrouseSeptr. 12th Wednesday 1804    Set out early    a Dark Cloudey morning wind from the N W.    cold    passed, (a village of Little Squerals or Prarie dogs opsd. Camp on the N. Side.)Clark(12th)Course Distance & reffrs. Septr. 12thN.45° W.4miles to a point of wood on the L. S.    Passed an Island in the
Center of the river and Several Sand bars (1) on which we
found great dificuelty in passing the water being verry Shallow 4 Septr. 12th Wednesday 1804
a Dark Cloudy Day the wind hard from the N. W.    we passed (1) a Island the middle of the river at the head of which we found great dificuelty in passing between the Sand bars    the water Swift and Shallow, it took ¾ of the day to make one mile, we Camped on the L. S. opsd. a Village of Barking Prarie Squriels
I walked out in the morn:g and Saw Several Villages of those little animals, also a great number of Grous & 3 foxes, and observed Slate & Coal mixed, Some verry high hills on each Side of the river.    rains a little all day.

Ordway
Wednesday 12th Sept. 1804.    the wind shifted Since last night in to the North. Set off as usual    proceded on Slowly.    the current Swift & wind a head.—    Capt. Clark walked on Shore S. S. Sergt. Gass & Newman with him.—    we had Some difficulty owing to the river being Shallow.    the Boat wheeled Several times and creened on hir Side So that we were obledged to Spring out and hold hir from oversetting.    we hunted for the channel & were forced to turn back some distance & take another channel.—    We Camped on S. S.    Capt. Lewis went out found another village of little Dogs in a Bottom prarie above the Island we called Troublesome Isd.GassWednesday 12th.    We set out as usual and had a cloudy day; passed a long range of black bluffs on the south side, and an island covered with timber, which is all the timber that can be seen from this place. The country round is all hills and prairie. Captain Clarke, myself and another went out to hunt, and did not return till after dark. The boat had much difficulty in passing on account of the sand bars and strong current, and did not make to day more than four miles.WhitehouseWednesday 12 Sept. 1804    Clouday.    R. Fields continued on with the horse.    passed a long range of black bluffs on the S. S. and an Island covered with timber.    that is all the wood that is to be Seen at this place.    all the 
country is hills and praries.    at 12 oclock Capt. ClarkNewman and Sergt. Gass went a hunting.    those in the barge had a Great deal of trouble to Git along the Sand bars, their was So many and the current So rapid that we did not come more than 4 miles.    Camped after dark on the S Side.
Wednesday Septemr 12th    This morning Cloudy, the Man who had the horse on shore, continued on with him.    We set out about 8 o'clock A. M. and passed a long range of black bluffs, lying on the South side of the River; and an Island covered with timber, which is the only place here that had wood on it.    The country here being Priaries and hills.    At 12 oClock A. M. Captain Clarke and two of our Serjeants landed, in order to go a hunting.    The Men who were in the barge, had a great deal of trouble to get her along, their being so many sand Barrs in the way, and the current running, so rapid against us, so that we did not come more than 4 Miles this day.    We came too after dark, & encamped on the South side of the River,

Evidently later Durex, or Hiram Wood, Island. Atlas map 20; MRC map 35; MRY map 37.The sharp-tailed grouse, a Lewis and Clark discovery although they apparently never gave a full description of it. They sent a live specimen to Jefferson from Fort Mandan in April 1805, but it did not survive the journey. Cutright (LCPN), 81, 121, 375–77.The prairie dog village, not the camp, was on the north side. The camp was apparently a short distance north of the Lyman-Gregory county line, South Dakota. Atlas map 20; MRC map 36.Clark mistakes the Pierre Shale, which is very rich in organic matter and dark gray to black in color, for slate and coal.Including the Bijou Hills in Brule County, east of the river. Nicollet (MMR), 411; MRC map 36.Apparently a short distance north of the Lyman-Gregory county line, South Dakota.Newman.They camped in Brule County, South Dakota.Whitehouse again may have written "4" over "6" for the year.