June 3, 1806LewisTuesday June 3rd 1806.
Our invalids are all on the recovery; Bratton is much stronger and can walk about with considerable ease.    the Indian Cheif appears to be gradually recovering the uce of his limbs, and the child is nearly well; the imposthume on his neck has in a great measure subsided and left a hard lump underneath his left ear; we still continue the application of the onion poltice.    at 2 P. M. The Broken arm and 3 of his wariars visited us and remained all night. Colter, Jo. Fields and Willard returned this evening with five deer and one bear of the brown speceis; the hair of this was black with a large white spot on the breast containing a small circular black spot.    today the Indians dispatched an express over the mountains to travellers rest or the neighbourhood of that Creek on Clark's river in order to learn from the Oote-lash-shoots a band of the Flatheads who have wintered there, the occurrences that have taken place on the East side of the mountains during that season.    this is the band which we first met with on that river.    the mountains being practicable for this express we thought it probable that we could also pass, but the indians informed us that several of the creek would yet swim our horses, that there was no grass and that the roads were extreemly deep and slipery; they inform us that we may pass conveniently in twelve or fourteen days.    we have come to a resolution to remove from hence to the quawmash grounds beyond Collins's creek on the 10th to hunt in that neighbourhood a few days, if possible lay in a stock of meat and then attempt the mountains about the middle of this month. I begin to lose all hope of any dependance on the Salmon as this river will not fall sufficiently to take them before we shall leave it, and as yet I see no appearance of their runing near the shores as the indians informed us they would in the course of a few days. I find that all the salmon which they procure themselves they obtain on Lewis's river, and the distance thither is too great for us to think of sending after them even had we merchandize with which to purchase.
ClarkTuesday June 3rd 1806
Our invalids are all on the recovery; bratten is much Stronger and can walk about with Considerable ease.    the Indian Chief appears to be gradually recovering the use of his limbs, and the child is nearly well; the inflomation on his neck Continus but the Swelling appears to Subside. we Still Continue the application of the onion poltice.    at 3 P. M. the broken arm and three wariors visited us and remained all night. Colter, Jos. Fields and Willard returned this evening with five deer and one bear of the brown Species; the hair of this was black with a large white Spot on the breast containing a Small circular black Spot.    (this Species of bear is Smaller than our Common black bear) this was a female bear and as our hunters informed us had cubs last year, this they judged from the length and Size of her tits &c.    this bear I am Confident is not larger than the yerlin Cubs of our Country. To day the Indians dispatched an express over the mountains to Travellers rest or to the neighbourhood of that Creek on Clark's river in order to learn from a band of Flat-Heads who inhabit that river and who have probably Wintered on Clarks river near the enterance of travellers rest Creek, the occurrences which have taken place on the East Side of the mountains dureing the last winter.    this is the band which we first met with on that river.    the Mountains being practicable for this express we thought it probable that we could also pass, but the Chiefs informs us that Several of the Creek's would yet swim our horses, that there was no grass and that the road was extreemly deep and slipery; they inform us that we may pass Conveniently in twelve or fourteen days.    we have come to a resolution to remove from hence to the Quawmash Grounds beyond Colins Creek on the 10th to hunt in that neighbourhood a fiew days, if possible lay in a Stock of Meat, and then attempt the Mountains about the Middle of this month. I begin to lose all hope of any dependance on the Salmon as this river will not fall Sufficiently to take them before we Shall leave it, and as yet I see no appearance of their running near the Shore as the indians informed us they would in the course of a fiew days. I find that all the Salmon which they precure themselves they obtain on Lewis's river, and the distance thither is too great for us to think of Sending after them, even had we merchendize with which to purchase the salmon.—.

Ordway
Tuesday 3rd June 1806.    clouded up and Sprinkled a little rain.    a number of the natives visited us.    three of our hunters came in had killed five deer and one black bear.    my horse that I wrode over to the kimooenim river nearly failed and his back verry sore and poor & in low Spirits and as luck would have it an Indian brought me a large good strong horse and Swaped with me as he knew my horse to be good when in order to run the buffaloe which is their main object to git horses that will run and Swap their best horses for Servis, for them that will run if they are not half as good as otherways.


GassTuesday 3rd.    This was a cloudy morning with a few drops of rain; and there were some light showers during the forenoon at intervals. The river rises in the night, and falls in the day time; which is occasioned by the snow melting by the heat of the sun on the mountains, which are too distant for the snow water to reach this place until after night. In the evening three hunters came in with the meat of five deer and a small bear. Several of the natives continued at our camp.



A "cinnamon bear"; see May 31, 1806.Lolo Creek and the Bitterroot River, in Missoula County, Montana. Atlas map 69.See September 4, 1805. The reference is to the Salish, or Flatheads.Note that the Nez Perces assumed that their messengers could make it across the mountains in spite of the snow but did not believe the white men could. Subsequent events proved them correct.To Weippe Prairie, north of Lolo Creek in Clearwater County, Idaho, where they had first met the Nez Perces on September 20, 1805. Atlas map 71.The stubs of several pages of the notebook are apparent between this entry and the
previous one.Colter, Joseph Field, and Willard, write the captains.