August 23, 1806ClarkSaturday 23rd August 1806
We Set out very early, the wind rose & became very hard, we passed the Sar-war-kar-na-har river at 10 A. M and at half past eleven the wind became So high and the water So rough that we were obliged to put to Shore and Continue untill 3 p. M. when we had a Small Shower of rain after which the wind lay, and we proceeded on. Soon after we landed I Sent Shields & Jo. & Reubin Fields down to the next bottom of timber to hunt untill our arival.    we proceeded on Slowly and landed in the bottom.    the hunters had killed three Elk and 3 Deer the deer were pore and Elk not fat    had them fleece & brought in.    the Musqueters large and very troublesom.    at 4 P. M a Cloud from the N W with a violent rain for about half an hour    after the rain we again proceeded on. I observe great quantities of Grapes and Choke Cheries, also a Speces of Currunt which I had never before observed the leas is larger than those above, the Currt. black and very inferior to either the yellow, red, or perple—    at dark we landed on a Small Sand bar under a Bluff on the S W. Side and encamped, this Situation was one which I had Chosen to avoid the Musquetors, they were not very troublesome after we landed.    we Came only 40 Miles to daye
My Frend Capt Lewis is recoverig fast    the hole in his thy where the Ball passed out is Closed and appears to be nearly well.    the one where the ball entered discharges very well—.
Ordway
Saturday 23rd August 1806.    we Set out eairly    a little rain & Thunder. Saw a large gang of Elk on S. Side.    about 11 A. M. the wind rose So high that it detained us about 3 hours    our hunters killed three Elk and a deer    took the best of the meat and procd. on    had light Showers of rain all day and Campd. on S. Side.


GassSaturday 23rd.    We set out early in a fine morning, but the wind was high; and we went on very well till near noon, when the wind blew so hard that we had to halt, and were detained about four hours. Three hunters went on ahead by land, and when we had overtaken them they had killed two elk and some deer, and we halted to take in the meat. Here we had a very heavy shower of rain, which detained us another hour. We encamped at night and found the musquitoes very troublesome.


The "Sur-war-kar-ne" of October 7, 1804, present Moreau River in Dewey County, South Dakota. Atlas map 25; MRC map 44.The currant is the wild black currant again. See April 30, 1805, for a discussion of regional currants.This camp would be in Potter County, South Dakota, probably below the present crossing of U.S. Highway 212 and above the camp of October 4, 1804, on Dolphees Island. They had passed Moreau River, in Dewey County, during the day. The site would now be inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Mattison (OR), 63–64; Atlas map 24; MRC map 43.Clark says he sent Shields and the Field brothers ahead to hunt.