October 22, 1804Clark22nd of October 1804    last night at about 1 oClock I was violently attacked with Rhumetism in my neck, which was so violently I could not move, Cap L. applied a hot Stone raped in flannel which gave temperry ease, we passed a War party of Tetons on their way as we Supposed to the Mandans of 12 men on the L. S.    we gave them nothing and refused to put them across the river, passed 2 old Villages at the mouth of a large Creek L. S and a Small Island at the head of which is a bad place, an old Village on the S. S. and the upper of the 6 Villages the Mandans occupied about 25 years ago    this village was entirely cut off by the Sioux & one of the others nearly, the Small Pox distroyed great NumbersCourse & DistancN. 50° W.3m to a pt. on the S. S.N 34° W.3m. to the Lower pt. of an Island on the L. S.N. 34 W3to a pt. on L. S.    passed old vig S S & a Bad riffleN.1m to a pt. on the L. S,N. 24° W.2m to a pt. on the S. S.—Clark22nd October Monday 1804		
last night at 1 oClock I was violently and Suddinly attacked with the Rhumitism in the neck which was So violent I could not move    Capt. [Lewis] applied a hot Stone raped in flannel, which gave me some temporry ease,—.    we Set out early, the morning Cold    at 7 oClock we Came too at a Camp of TetonSeaux on the L. S.    those people 12 in number were naikd and had the appearanc of war, we have every reason to believ that they are going or have been to Steel horses from the Mandins, they tell two Stories, we gave them nothing    after takeing brackfast proceeded on—    my Neck is yet verry painfull at times Spasms.    [NB: Passed old Mandan village near which we lay, another at 4 miles one at 8 miles (4 miles further) at mouth of large creek all on Larboard Side.]
Camped on the L Side, passed an Island Situated on the L. Side at the
head of which & Mandans village S. S. [NB: 2 miles above] we passd a bad place—    [NB: <above the island 2 miles from last village>]    The hunters killed a buffalow bull, they Say out of about 300 buffalow which they Saw, they <only> did not See one Cow. Great Deel of Beaver Sign. Several Cought every night.22d OctrCourse Distance & reffurenceN. 50° W  3miles to a pt. on the S. S.N. 34° W.  3miles to the lower point on an Island on the L. S.N. 34° W.  3miles to a pt. on the S. S.    passed a bad ripple on barNorth  1mile to a point on the L. S.    a deep bend to S. S.N. 24° W  2miles to a point on the S. Side.—12
[NB: The mounds, 9 in number along river within 20 miles the fallen down earth of the houses, some teeth and bones of men & animals mixed in these villages, human Skulls, are Scattered in these villages] 

OrdwayMonday 22nd Oct. Some Snow last night.    the frenchman in the cannoe who are in company with us have Caught Several large Beaver every night for Several nights back.    we Set off eairly Cloudy & cool this morning.    we proceeded on at 9 oClock    we met a 11 Indians of the Souix nation yankton tribe.    they were naked & Sd. they were on their way down the River    Gave them Some meat and proceeded on.    at 11 oC. I went out hunting.    the after part of the day pleasant. I Saw on the hills flocks of Goats & Buffaloes. Several Salt Runs in the vallies. I killed a Buffalow and Returned to the Boat in the evening. Camped on the South Side.


GassMonday 22nd.    Some snow fell last night, and the morning was cloudy and cold. We embarked early and went on. At 9 we saw 11 Indians of the Sioux nation coming down from the Mandans, who, notwithstanding the coldness of the weather, had not an article of clothing except their breech-clouts. At 1 o'clock the day became clear and pleasant and we encamped at night on the south side.

Whitehouse	
Monday October 22d    This morning was Cold & Cloudy, We set off about 9 oClock A. M.    we passed on, and saw Eleven of the Souix Indians coming down the River in Canoes, from the Mandan Nation, at One oClock P. M. the weather cleared off and became pleasant    In the Evening we encamped on the South side of the River.—


Most of these villages, in Morton and Burleigh counties, North Dakota, are marked on Atlas map 28. The creek—Hunting Creek on the Atlas map—is  Square Butte Creek, in Morton County. MRC map 50; MRY map 142. The most conspicuous village in this locale is the Boley site, which appears to be a late eighteenth century Mandan site. It lies half-way between the camp of October 21 and the mouth of Square Butte Creek. Will & Hecker, 103–6.The village is today's Double DitchMandan site, now a North Dakota State Historic Site. Will & Spinden, 82 passim.Probably in southeast Oliver County, North Dakota, just above the Morton County line. Atlas map 28; MRC map 50."L. S." in the Field Notes. "S. S." is probably correct; see Atlas map 28.