April 1, 1805Clark
April 1st 1805    we have Thunder lightning hail and rain to day    the first rain of note Sinc the 15 of October last, I had the Boat Perogus & Canos put in the water, and expect to Set off the boat with despatches    in her will go 6 Americans 3 frenchmen, and perhaps Several ricarra Chief imediately after we Shall assend in 2 perogus & 6 canoes, accompanied by 5 french who intends to assend a Short distance to trap the beavr which is in great abundance highr up    our party will consist of one Interpter & Hunter, one French man as an interpreter with his two wives (this man Speaks Minetary to his wives who are L hiatars or Snake Indians of the nations through which we Shall pass, and to act as interpretress thro him[)]—    26 americans & french my servant and an Mandan Indian and provisions for 4 months—
ClarkFort Mandan
April the 1st Tuesday 1805
The fore part of to day haile rain with Thunder & lightning, the rain continued by intimitions all day, it is worthey of remark that this is the 1st rain which has fallen Since we have been here or Since the 15 of October last, except a fiew drops at two or three defferent times—
had the Boat Perogus & Canoes all put into the water. 
Ordway
Monday April 1st 1805. Cloudy.    thunder and large hail, hard rain followed about half an hour then the party turned out and put the Barge and the 8 perogues in to the River    commenced raining again at 4 oClock P. M. and continued raining untill 12 oClock at night.Monday 1st April 1805.    Thunder and hail & hard rain about 8 oClock this morning for about an hour.    the party then turned out and put the Big Barge and the 8 perogues in to the River.    began to rain again about 4 ock. P. M.    rained untill 12 o.C. at night & ceased.


GassMonday 1st April 1805.    As our large boat was to return immediately to St. Louis, the whole of our craft was put into the water. A considerable quantity of rain fell this day; the first of any consequence that had fallen here for six months. The 2nd, was a fair day but windy. On the 3rd the weather was fine and pleasant. Some boxes were made, in which it was intended to have packed skins of different animals, which had been procured in the country, to be sent down in the batteaux.

Whitehouse
Monday April 1st    This morning we had some rain, which lasted about 2 hours & clear'd up Cool, all our party was employed in putting the Boat & Pettyaugers into the River, which they Effected.—



Clark seems to have no entries for March 31, 1805, in either his Field Notes or Codex C, probably due to his misdating of the last few days in March. Clark may have neglected either Field Notes or Codex C or both for several days during this busy time, and in resuming on or after April 1, was misled by his wrong dates and failed to realize there was no March 31 entry. The resumption of daily entries in the Field Notes on March 24 (March 25 by Clark's reckoning) after months of skimpy and irregular writing in them suggests that he was using them once more as the basis for Codex C during this hectic period, and that in transferring into Codex C he repeated the dating error. From April 1 his dates appear to be correct, but he still has the days of the week wrong up through the April 7 entry in Codex C. Biddle has corrected them in red, but we do not carry his emendations.George Drouillard served as both hunter and interpreter.Apparently the captains intended to take both of Charbonneau's wives along, but something unrecorded happening in the last few days at Fort Mandan resulted in Sacagawea's being the only one actually to make the trip.The word is difficult to read, but it is clearly a reference to the Shoshones, the people of Sacagawea and Charbonneau's other wife. However spelled, it is apparently a variation of "Ietan," also L'Iatan, Aliatan, and many other variants. In the captains' "Estimate of the Eastern Indians," sent back to Jefferson from Fort Mandan, the word is "Alitans" or "Aliatans." This name was applied loosely by Plains tribes and traders to the Utes, the Shoshones, or the Comanches (all "Snakes" in the sign language), depending on the context. The derivation is perhaps from the Utes' name for themselves. Hodge, 1:594–95; 2:556–57; Hyde (IHP), 99–100, 183–84, 200–02.The second entry for April 1 begins a new section and a new page of Ordway's first journal notebook. He repeats entries for April 1 and 2.