February 7, 1806LewisFriday February 7th 1806.
This evening Sergt. Ordway and Wiser returned with a part of the meat which R. Fields had killed; the ballance of the party with Sergt. Gass remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a point agreed on where the canoe is to meet them again tomorrow morning. This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it consisted of a marrowbone a piece and a brisket of boiled Elk that had the appearance of a little fat on it.    this for Fort Clatsop is living in high stile. In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in our country    I first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish nation, and again below the grand rappids In the Columbian Valley on tidewater. The Elder also common to our country grows in great abundance in the rich woodlands on this side of the rocky Mountains; tho' it differs Here in the colour of it's berry, this being of a pale sky blue while that of the U' States is a deep perple. The seven bark or nine-bark as it is called in the U' States is also common in this quarter. There is a species of huckleberry common to the piny lands from the commencement of the Columbian valley to the seacoast; it rises to the hight of 6 or 8 feet.    is a simple branching some what defuse stem; the main body or trunk is cilindric and of a dark brown, while the colateral branches are green smoth, squar, and put forth anumber of alternate branches of the same colour and form from the two horizontal sides only.    the fruit is a small deep perple berry which the natives inform us is very good.    the leaf is thin of a pale green and small being ¾ of an inch in length and ⅜ in width; oval terminateing more accutely at the apex than near the insertion of the footstalk which is at the base; veined, nearly entire, serrate but so slightly so that it is scarcely perceptile; footstalk short and there position with rispect to each other is alternate and two ranked, proceeding from the horizontal sides of the bough only. The small pox has distroyed a great number of the natives in this quarter.    it prevailed about 4 years since among the Clatsops and distroy several hundred of them, four of their chiefs fell victyms to it's ravages.    those Clatsops are deposited in their canoes on the bay a few miles below us. I think the late ravages of the small pox may well account for the number of remains of vilages which we find deserted on the river and Sea coast in this quarter.—
ClarkFriday February 7th 1806
This evening Serjt Ordway and wiser returned with a part of the meat which R. Field had killed; the balance of the Party with Serjt. Gass remained in order to bring the ballance of the meat to the river at a point agreed on, where the Canoe is to meet them again tomorrow morning.    This evening we had what I call an excellent supper it consisted of a marrowbone, a piece of brisket of boiled Elk that had the appearance of a little fat on it.    this for Fort Clatsop is liveing in high Stile, and in fact fiesting—.
In this neighbourhood I observe the honeysuckle common in the U States, I first met with it on the waters of the Kooskooske near the Chopunnish Nation, and again below the grand rapids in the Columbian Vally on tide water. The Elder also common to our Countrey grows in great abundance in the rich wood land on this Side of the rocky mountains, tho it differs here in the Colour of its berry, this being of a pale Sky blue while that of the U, States is a deep purple. The Seven or nine bark as it is called in the U, States is also Common in this quarter. There is a Species of huckkleberry Common to the piney lands from the Commencement of the Columbian Vally to the Sea coast; it rises to the hight of 6 or 8 feet, is a Simple branching, Somewhat defused Stem; the main body or trunk is cilindric    branches are green Smothe squar, and put foth a number of alternet branches of the Same Colour and form from the two horizontal Sides only.    the frute is a small deep purple berry which the nativs inform us is very good, the leaf is thin of a <deep> pale green and Small being ¾ of an inch in length and ⅜ in width; oval terminateing more accoutely at the apax, than near the insertion of the footstalk which is at the base vened nearly entire; footstalks Short and their position in respect to each other is alternate and too ranked, proceeding from the horizontal Side of the bough only.
The Small Pox had distroyed a great number of the nativs in this quarter. it provailed about 4 or 5 yrs Sinc among the Clatsops, and distroy'd Several hundreds of them, four of their Chiefs fell a victym to it's ravages. these Clatsops are Deposited in their Canoes on the bay a fiew miles below us. I think the late ravages of the Small Pox, may well acount for the number of remains of villages which I Saw on my rout to the Kil a mox in Several places—.

Ordway
Friday 7th Feby. 1806.    we packed the meat to the River or marsh. I and one man went to the Fort with the canoe and some meat    hard rain &C.—


GassFriday 7th.    The morning was fair, and all hands engaged in bringing in 
the meat; we got some to the fort; but myself and part of the men had again 
to encamp out. It rained hard and we had a disagreeable night.


Whitehouse
Friday Febry 7th    The weather continued pleasant.    the Men that went after the Elk meat, carried it on their backs to a marsh near to the River, where they could come with a Canoe.    they then encamped at that place.    Two Men were sent from that place with a Canoe & part of the Meat to the fort.    Nothing worth mentioning happened at the fort this day.    The Men there were employ'd as Yesterday.    A short time after dark we had a hard Rain—



Orange honeysuckle, Lonicera ciliosa (Pursh) DC., a new species first observed on the Lolo Trail. It has numerous medicinal uses among the tribes of western Washington. Hitchcock et al., 4:458; Gunther (EWW), 48; Cutright (LCPN), 212, 261 n. 19, 410.The blue elderberry; the species used for comparison is the common elderberry, Sambucus canadensis L. Fernald, 1342. This passage is struck through with a red vertical line, perhaps placed by Biddle.The ninebark, first mentioned on December 1, 1805.Lewis's huckleberry may be mountain huckleberry, Vaccinium membranaceum Dougl. ex. Hook., a new species. Hitchcock et al., 4:32; Cutright (LCPN), 212, 422. However, oval-leaf blueberry, Vaccinium 0valifolium Sm., may be a better candidate for Lewis's huckleberry than the mountain huckleberry, a montane species that Lewis may have seen upriver near the Cascades.At least two smallpox epidemics occurred among the Chinookan peoples of the Lower Columbia Valley before the arrival of Lewis and Clark. The first, during the 1770s, was probably particularly devastating, as it presumably took hold upon populations previously unaffected by this disease. Smallpox was then reintroduced in 1800–1801 as Lewis indicates. For an assessment of the effects of disease on the Chinookans and other native Northwest Coast peoples, see Boyd.Weiser, say the captains.According to Lewis, Ordway and Weiser returned while Gass and the rest of the detachment stayed out.