December 22, 1804Clark22nd December Satturday 1804
a number of Squars womn & men Dressed in Squars Clothes Came with Corn to Sell to the men for little things, we precured two horns of the animale the french Call the rock mountain Sheep [bighorn]    those horns are not of the largest kind—    The mandans Indians Call this Sheep Ar-Sar-ta    it is about the Size of a large Deer, or Small Elk, its Horns Come out and wind around the head like the horn of a Ram and the teckere [NB: texture] not unlike it    much larger and thicker perticelarly that part with which they but or outer part which is [blank] inchs thick, the length of those horns, which we have isLewisSaturday December 22nd 1804.
Observed Equal altitudes of ☉ with Sextant hm  s  hm  sA.M.9  643     P.M.12539 "  952  "2857 "13  9  "3210 hm  sCronometer too slow on Mean time03937.6Ordway
Saturday 22nd Decr.    pleasant moderate weather.    we continued Setting the Pickets    a Great nomber of the Savages visited us brought corn & beans to Trade with us    they wanted of us looking Glases Beeds buttens or & other kinds of articles pleasing to the Eye.

GassSaturday 22nd.    The weather continued clear, pleasant and warm. A great number of the natives came with corn, beans and mockasins to trade, for which they would take any thing— old shirts, buttons, awls, knives and the like articles.

WhitehouseSaturday 22nd Dec. 1804    a clear pleasant warm day    a great nomber of 
the natives came to the fort with corn beans and moccasons to trade.    they take any trifling thing in exchange viz. old Shirts buttons knives awls &c &c.
Saturday decemr 22nd    This day we had fine pleasant weather    in the morning a number of the Natives came to our Fort, and brought with them, some Corn Beans, and moccosins, to Trade with us.—    They exchanged those articles, for old Shirts, buttons, knives &ca. and went away in the Evening seemingly well pleased with their Trade.—

Male transvestites were to be found among a number of plains tribes. The Anglo-Americans called them by the French traders' term "berdache," from the French bardache, a homosexual male, which Clark later and somewhat incorrectly explained to Biddle that they were. Nicholas Biddle Notes [ca. April 1810], Jackson (LLC), 2:531. Ronda (LCAI), 130–31, discusses the spiritual nature of this phenomenon, while Whitehead looks at the larger institution of gender-crossing.See below, May 25, 1805, for a description by Lewis based on observation. Clark "Ar-Sar-ta" is probably the Mandan term, áŋse xte, "big horn."Lewis's astronomical observation from Codex O.