May 26, 1806LewisMonday May 26th 1806.
Had frequent showers in the course of the last night. Collins, Shannon and Colter set out to hunt on the high lands some distance up on the N. E. side of Collins's Creek. The Clyster given the Child last evening operated very well.    it is clear of fever this evening and is much better, the swelling is considerably abated and appears as if it would pass off without coming to a head.    we still continue fresh poltices of onions to the swolen part.    we directed the indians in what manner to treat the dieased Cheif, gave him a few dozes of flour of sulpher and Creem of tartar & some portable soupe and directed them to take him home.    they seemed unwilling to comply with the latter part of the injunction for they consumed the day and remained with us all night.    at 1 P. M. Joseph and R. Feilds returned, accompanyed by Hohâstillpilp several other inferior Cheifs and some young men. These hunters informed us they were unable to reach the grounds to which they had been directed in consequence of the debth and rapidity of a large creek which falls in about 10 Ms. above. they passed Commearp Creek at about 1½ Ms. and a second creek reather larger at 3 Ms. further.    at the distance of 4 Ms. up this last creek on their return they called at a village which our traders have never yet visited, here they obtained a large quantity of bread and roots of Cows on very moderate terms.    we permitted Sergt. Pryor and four men to pass the river tomorrow morning with a view to visit this village    we also directed CharbonoYork and LePage to set out early for the same place and procure us some roots.    our meat is again exhausted, we therefore directed R. Fields to hunt the horse in the morning which the Indians have given us to kill.    one of our men saw a salmon in the river today.    in the afternoon we compleated our canoe and put her in the water; she appears to answer very well and will carry about 12 persons.—    the river still rising fast and snows of the mountains visibly diminish
ClarkMonday 26th May 1806
Some Small Showers of rain last night, and continued Cloudy this morning untill 7 A. M when it Cleared away and became fair and worm. CollinsShannon & Colter set out to hunt on the high lands to the N E of us towards Collins Creek. The Child Something better this morning tho the Swelling yet continues.    we Still apply the onion poltice. I derected what Should be done for the disabled man, gave him a fiew doses of Creem of tarter & flour Sulphur, and Some portable Supe and directed that he Should be taken home & Swetted &c.    at 1 P. M. Joseph & R. Fields returned accompanied by Hoh hâst ill pilt and an Second Cheif and 4 men Several young men also rode down on this Side. Jo & R Fields informed us that they were at a village 4 Miles up the 2nd Creek from this place on the opposit side above at which place on the opposit side above at which place they precured roots on very reasonable terms.    they Could not proceed higher up to hunt as the creeks were too high for them to Cross, &c.    we gave permission to Serjt. Pryor and 4 men to cross the river and trade with nativs of the village the Field's were at yesterday for roots &c.    we also directed Shabono & york to proceed on to the Same Village and precure Some roots for our Selves if possible.    one of our men Saw a Salmon in the river to day.    and two others eat of Salmon at the near Village which was brought from Lewis's river.    our Canoe finished and put into the water.    it will Carry 12 men.    the riseing very fast and Snow appear to melt on the Mountains.


Ordway
Monday 26th of May 1806.    clear & pleasant.    two men went out a hunting.    we finished the canoe and put it in the river.    a number of the natives visited us.    the river riseing.    our two hunters returnd from the South Side of the river.    the creek being so high they did not go to where was any hunting but purchased considerable of Shappalell and couse roots &C—


GassMonday 26th.    This day was fine and pleasant, and we finished our canoe and put her into the water.— In the afternoon two hunters came in, but had 
not killed any thing: they had procured some roots at a village about fourteen miles up the river. Our stock of provisions is exhausted, and we have nothing to eat but some roots, which we get from the natives at a very dear rate.


Apparently the South Fork Clearwater River, meeting the Middle Fork near Kooskia in Idaho County, Idaho, not shown on any Atlas map.The captains count three men: Collins, Shannon, and Colter.The Field brothers.The Field brothers; Lewis and Clark note that they were accompanied by Hohots Ilppilp and other Nez Perces.