January 12, 1806LewisMonday [NB: Sunday] January 12th 1806.
The men who were sent in surch of the canoe returned without being able to find her, we therefore give her over as lost. This morning sent out Drewyer and one man to hunt, they returned in the evening, Drewyer having killed seven Elk; I scarcely know how we should subsist were it not for the exertions of this excellet hunter. At 2 P. M. the ballance of the party who had been left by Capt. C. arrived; about the same time the two hunters also arrived who had been dispatched by Capt C. for the purpose of hunting on the 9th inst.; they had killed nothing. We have heretofore usually divided the meat when first killed among the four messes into which we have divided our party leaving to each the care of preserving and the discretion of using it, but we find that they make such prodigal use of it when they hapen to have a tolerable stock on hand that we have determined to adapt a different system with our present stock of seven Elk; this is to jerk it & issue it to them in small quantities.—
ClarkSunday the 12th January 1806
This morning Sent our Drewyer and one man to hunt, they returned in the evening Drewyer haveing killed 7 Elk; I scercely know how we Should Subsist, I beleive but badly if it was not for the exertions of this excellent hunter; maney others also exert themselves, but not being accquainted with the best method of finding and killing the elk and no other wild animals is to be found in this quarter, they are unsucksessfull in their exertions.    at 2 P. M Serjt. Gass and the men I left to assist the Salt makers in Carrying in their meat arrived also the hunters which I directed to hunt in the point, they killed nothing—.    We have heretofore devided the meat when first killed among the four messes, into which we have divided our party, leaveing to each the Care of preserving and distribution of useing it; but we find that they make such prodigal use of it when they happen to have a tolerable Stock on hand, that we are determined to adapt a Different System with our present stock of Seven Elk; this is to jurk it and issue it to them in Small quantities—.
Ordway
Sunday 12th Jany. 1806.    a fair morning.    2 men went out a hunting.    3 men went again to look for a canoe but did not find it. Several men returned from the Salt Camp.    towards evening the 2 hunters who went out this morning came in    had killed 7 Elk within about 2 miles of the ft.


Whitehouse
Sunday Janry 12th    A Clear pleasant Morning.    Two Men went out hunting from the fort, & 3 other Men were sent to take another Search for our small Canoe.    they returned without being able to find it.    Several of our Men returned from the Salt Camp on the Ocean, to the Fort,—
In the Evening the two hunters returned to the fort, they had killed 7 Elk within about 2 Miles of the fort,



Including Drouillard, according to Lewis and Clark.Including Gass, Shannon, Frazer, and Gibson.One was Drouillard, according to the captains.Including Gass, Shannon, Frazer, and Gibson.