August 29, 1804Clark
29th August Wednesday 1804—    rained last night and Some this morning    verry cloudy    Set Some men to work to make a Toe rope of Elk Skin, and my Self to write, Sent one man to pursue Shannon a head with Some provisions, I am much engaged writeing a Speech    at 4 oclock Sergt. Pryor & Mr. Durion the Soues interpeter with about 70 Soues arrived on the opposit Side of the river    we Sent over for them, who came over Mr. D. & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over    Mr. Durion informed that three Chiefs were of the Party, we Sent over Serjt. Pryor with young Mr. Durion, Six Kettles for the Indians to Cook the meat they Killed on the way from their Camp (2 Elk & 6 Deer) a bout a bucket of Corn & 2 twists of Tobacco to Smoke intending to Speak to them tomorrow—    G. Drewyer Killed a Deer—.    Sergt. Pryor informs that when he approached the Indian Camp they Came to meet the[m] Supposeing Cap Lewis or my Self to be of the party intending to take us in a roabe to their Camp—    he approached the Camp which was handsum made of Buffalow Skins Painted different Colour, their Camps formed of a Conic form Containing about 12 or 15 persons each and 40 in number, on the River Jacque of 100 yds wide & Deep Containing but little wood, They had a fat dog Cooked as a feest; for them, and a Snug aptmt for them to lodge    on their march they passed thro plains Covd. with game &. &. &.Clark29th August Wednesday 1804
Some rain last night & this morning, Sent on Colter with Provisions in pursute of Shannon, had a Toe roap made of Elk Skin, I am much engaged reriteing— at 4 oClock P M. Sergt. Pryor & Mr. Dorion with 5 Chiefs and about 70 men &c. [boys?] arrived on the opposite Side    we Sent over a Perogue & Mr. Dorrion & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over with Serjt Pryer, and informed us that the Chiefs were there    we Sent Serjt. Pryor & yound Mr. Dorion with Som Tobacco, Corn & a few Kittles for them to Cook in, with directions to inform the Chiefs that we would Speek to them tomorrow.    Those Indians brought with them for their own use 2 Elk & 6 Deer which the young men Killed on the way from their Camp <15>    12 [NB: 12] miles distant.Serjt. Pryor informs me that when Came near the Indian Camp they were met by men with a Buffalow roabe to Carry them, Mr. Dorion informed ["]they were not the Owners of the Boats & did not wish to be Carried"—    the Sceouex Camps are handson of a Conic form Covered with Buffalow Roabs Painted different Colours and all Compact & hand Somly arranged, covered all round an orpen part in the Center for the fire, with Buffalow roabs    each Lodg has a place for Cooking detached, the lodges contain 10 to 15 persons—    a Fat Dog was presented as a mark of their Great respect for the party of which they partook hartily and thought it good & well flavored
The River Jacque is Deep & is navagable for Perogues a long distance up    at the mouth it is Shallow & narrow but above it is 80 or 90 yards wide passing thro: rich Praries with but little timber    this river passes the (Dumoin) Souex River and heads with the St Peters and a branch of Red river which which falls into Lake Winepik to the North OrdwayWednesday 29th    a hard Storm arose from the N W. of wind & rain about 8 o.C. last night    rained considerable part of the Night.    the men who went for the Indians did not return last night    Cloudy morning. Some Thunder, Colter Sent on for to find the man that went on with the horses    the pearogue repaired.    the lading put in the white pearogue; the men engaged making a Towing line out of our Green Elk hides, we have plenty of fine fat Cat fish the most of the Time. Several large ones caught last night.—    The Misouri river affords us pleanty of fish, & the Country pleanty of all kinds of Game.    in the afternoon Sergt. pryor & the 2 men who went with him returned to our Camp & brought with them 60 Indians of the Souix nation.    they Camped on the opposite Shore & did not incline to cross this evening.    our Captains Sent them over Some lyed Corn & Tobacco &.C—    Sargt. pryor informed me that their Town is about 9 miles from the Missouris up the R. Jacque.    their Town consisted of abt. [blank] lodges which was made of painted red & white dressed Buffelow & Elk Skins & is verry handsome; the Women homley the most of them old, but the young men handsome. G. Drewyer killed one Deer to day.

GassWednesday 29th.    At 8 o'clock last night a storm of wind and rain came on from the N. west, and the rain continued the greater part of the night. The morning was cloudy with some thunder. We are generally well supplied with Catfish, the best I have ever seen. Some large ones were taken last night. In the afternoon the men who had gone to the Indian camp returned and brought with them sixty Indians of the Sioux nation. They encamped for the evening upon the opposite shore, and some corn and tobacco were sent over to them. The sergeant who had gone to their camp informed me that their lodges, forty in number, are about nine miles from the Missouri on the Sacque river. They are made of dressed buffaloe and elk skins, painted red and white, and are very handsome. He said the women are homely and mostly old; but the young men likely and active. They killed a dog as a token of friendship. One of our men killed a deer.


Whitehouse
Wednesday 29th    a hard Storm arose from the N. W. last night abt. 8 oC— of wind & rain.    cloudy morning, Some Thunder, colter Sent on with Some provision for to hunt Shannon & the horses &c.    the pearogue repaired    the men make a Towing line out of our Elk Skins.    we have pleanty of fine cat fish which the party catch in the Missouri River, in the afternoon Sergt. pryor & the 2 men returned    brot with them 60 Indians of the Souix nation    they appeared to be friendly.    they camped on the opposite Shore    we carried them over Some provisions & capt Lewis Sent them Tobacco &c—    Sergt. pryor informed us that their Town was abt. 9 miles from the Missouri, and consisted of 40 lodges, and built with dressed Buffelow Skins &c—    painted different coulers &c—    G. Drewyer killed one Deer to day—
Wednesday August 29th    We had this night a hard Storm from the Northwest, accompanied with Thunder lightning & Rain, in the morning, a Man was sent out with some provisions, in Order to hunt the Men who were with the horses.    We set about repairing the Boat, which we compleated—    The men were employed making a Tow line out of Elk skins, and catching of fish.    they catch'd a great quantity of Cat fish in the River Mesouri, which afforded us an excellent dinner.    In the afternoon Serjeant Pryor & the two Men returned, having with them Sixty Indians of the Souix nation; they appear'd very friendly—    They are a handsome well made set of Indians, are about the middle stature, and do not cutt their hair as most the Savages in this part does.—    They encamped on the opposite shore to where we were.    The commanding officers sent them Provisions & Tobacco.—    Serjeant Pryor informed us, that their Town lay about 9 Miles from the Mesouri River, and consisted of 40 Lodges, and that their habitations were coverd with Buffalo skins & painted with different Colours.—    One of the hunters return'd in the Evening with a deer he had killed.—


Pierre Dorion, Senior, evidently had several sons by the wife he took among the YanktonSioux. The one met here is generally assumed to be Pierre, Junior, who later joined the Astorians' overland trek to the Pacific and was killed by Indians in Idaho in 1811. An apparent reference to "Francis Durwain" earlier (see above, August 19, 1804), suggests that another son had entered the picture earlier, perhaps during the second council with the Otos. Clark's reference here, on August 29, seems to indicate that they had just now met the son who was trading with the Sioux. Munnick (PD), 8:107–12; Speck, 150–86; Irving (Astor), 117–20.The following numerals are written under the August 29 entry about here on document 47 of the Field Notes: 125 64:64.The custom of carrying a distinguished visitor to camp seated on a buffalo robe supported by several men was evidently widespread among the Sioux. The Blackfeet Sioux (Sihasapa) greeted Father DeSmet thus in 1840. DeSmet, 1:253 and facing illustration.Clark may have been copying his Field Notes into his notebook Codices A and B, in anticipation of sending either the Field Notes or the notebooks back downriver with Corporal Warfington's party.This word might be read as "hastily," but Biddle has "heartily." Coues (HLC), 1:91.Clark repeats misinformation about the source of the James River. See above, August 27, 1804.Drouillard.Apparently a reference to the roached hairstyle of the men of several tribes of the Missouri River.