March 17, 1805Clark
17th of March Sunday    a windey Day    attempted to air our goods Chabonah Sent a french man of our party that he was Sorry for the foolissh part he had acted and if we pleased he would accompany us agreeabley to the terms we had perposed and doe every thing we wished him to doe &c. &c.    he had requested me Some <time> thro our French inturpeter two days ago to excuse his Simplicity and take him into the cirvise, after he had taken his things across the River we called him in and Spoke to him on the Subject, he agreed to our terms and we agreed that he might go on with us &c &c.    but fiew Indians here to day; the river riseing a little and Severall places open.

OrdwaySunday 17th March 1805.    clear and pleasant.    all the Indian Goods put out to air also the parched Meal. Mr. Sharbonow began to move his baggage across the river in order to Go up to the Grossvantares to live.    had Got the most of his things across the River he concluded and agreed to Go with us.    then moved his effects back to the Fort, & pitched a lodge near the Fort.    the wind high from the West. Warner has lost his Tommahawk, expect the Indians Stole it.


Probably François Labiche, whose services in translating between French and English Lewis later deemed worthy of extra pay, unless "French" here refers only to the man's origin and not to the language from which he translated. Charles McKenzie refers to a "mulatto who spoke bad French and worse English" who was interpreter between Charbonneau and the captains at Fort Mandan. This man is sometimes identified as York, but there is no evidence that Clark's servant knew French. Labiche seems the most likely person to be the "mulatto," although his ancestry is commonly given as half-French and half-Omaha. He may have had some black ancestry, or Mackenzie may have used the word "mulatto" in some sense other than the usual one. Charbonneau spoke little English at this time and needed an interpreter himself. Labiche may also be the Frenchman of the party mentioned above as Charbonneau's intermediary. Lewis to Henry Dearborn, January 15, 1807, Jackson (LLC), 1:367; Masson, 1:336–37. See also Appendix A.William Werner of the party.