April 23, 1805LewisTuesday April 23rd
Set out at an early hour this morning.    about nine A. M. the wind arose, and shortly after became so violent that we were unabled to proceed, in short it was with much difficulty and some risk that I was enabled to get the canoes and perogues into a place of tolerable safety, there being no timber on either side of the river at this place.    some of the canoes shiped water, and wet several parsels of their lading, which I directed to be opened and aired    we remained untill five in the evening when the wind abating in some measure, we reloaded, and proceeded.    shortly after we were joined by Capt. Clark who had walked on shore this morning, and passing through the bottom lands had fallen on the river some miles above <us>, and concluding that the wind had detained us, came down the river in surch of us.    he had killed three blacktaled, or mule deer, and a buffaloe Calf, in the course of his ramble.    these hard winds, being so frequently repeated, become a serious source of detention to us.—    incamped on the Stard. side.— Courses and distances of the 23rd AprilmilesS. 25° E.to a point of timbered land on Stard.—  2 ½S.along this Stard. point of woodland.    a high bluff opposite  1S. 78 W.to a cops of woods, under a hill on Stard in a bend  4S. 14 E.to a point of high timber in a Lard. bend passing the ex-
tremity of a little bay Std.  4 ½S. 25 W.to a point of woodland on the Lard. side.  1 ½  13 ½Clark23rd of April 1805
a cold morning    at about 9 oClock the wind as usial rose from the N W and continued to blow verry hard untill late in the evening    I walked on Shore after brackfast    in my walk on the S side passed through extensive bottoms of timber intersperced with glades & low open plains, I killed 3 mule or black tail Deer, which was in tolerable order, Saw Several others, I also killed a Buffalow Calf which was verry fine, I Struck the river above the Perogus which had Come too in a bend to the L. S. to Shelter from the wind which had become violently hard, I joined Capt Lewis in the evening & after the winds falling which was late in the evening we proceeded on & encamped on the S. S. The winds of this Countrey which blow with Some violence almost every day, has become a Serious obstruction in our progression onward, as we Cant move when the wind is high with[out] great risque, and [if] there was no risque the winds is generally a head and often too violent to proceedCourse & Distance 23d AprilS. 25° E  2 ½miles to a point of timbered land on the Starboard SideSouth  1mile on the Sd. point, of wood land a high Bluff opposit.S. 78° W.  4 miles to a Copse of woods under a hill to the Sd Side in a
bendS. 14° E.  4 ½miles to a point of high timber in a larboard bend, passing
the enterence of a little bay to S. S.S. 25° W.  1 ½miles to a point of woods on the Ld. SideMiles13 ½ OrdwayTuesday 23rd April 1805.    a clear and pleasant morning.    not quite as cold as it has been for Several morning.    we Set off as usal    proceeded on. Some of the men caught two beaver last night    passed high bluffs on the S. S. and a bottom in a bend on the N. S.    the river verry crooked    halted and took breakfast on a sand beach S. S.    one man Shot a beaver in the willows.    another Shot a Goose in the river, proceeded on    the wind blew So hard that the large perogues Sailed in a bend where the wind came fair verry high the Small canoes took in Some water.    the large perogues Sailed verry fast.    a Short distanc we were obledged to halt the first Safe place untill the wind abated which was about 3 hours.    dryed the articles which was wet.    towards evening the wind abated and we proceeded on round a point and Camped in a bottom covered with c. w. timber on N. S.    came 14½ miles to day. Capt. Clark killed to day one buffaloe Calf, and three black taild deer.—
GassTuesday 23rd.    We set our early and had a fine day; but the wind was ahead, and we were obliged to lie to about three hours. We went 15 miles and encamped on the North side. Captain Clarke killed 3 blacktailed deer 
and a buffaloe calf.


Whitehouse
Tuesday April 23rd    This morning, we had Clear weather and set off at the usual hour,—    (Early)    We proceeded on about 3 Miles, when the Wind blew so fresh, that we had to come too, it being a head Wind from the North west.—    We stopped for about two hours, & Captain Clark, and some of our Men went out hunting; We then proceeded <then> on our Voyage, & passed the finest thickets of Wood & level priaries, that we had seen, since we left the Mandan Nation, In the Evening, we came too, and Encamped  on the North side of the Mesouri River, having come 15 Miles this day.—    Captain Clark & the party that went with him hunting, joined us some short time after, having kill'd that day 3 large Male Deer, and a Buffalo Calf, which they brought to the Camp—


Evidently the first written use of the term "mule deer" for Odocoileus hemionus, an expedition discovery. See above, September 16, 1804. Cutright (LCPN), 83–84. Other references to deer in this chapter are to O. virginianus, white-tailed deer.The campside, where they remained until April 25, in Williams County, North Dakota, appears on Atlas map 56 as that for April 24 only. Atlas maps 34, 47; MRC map 59.Also given on Atlas map 35, in both captains' hands.When compared with other journals, this appears to be the true entry for April 23.