May 13, 1806LewisTuesday May 13th 1806.
This morning Capt. C. as usual was busily engaged with his patients untill eleven OCk.    at 1 P. M. we collected our horses and set out for the river escorted by a number of the natives on horseback.    we followed the creek downwards about two miles, passing a stout branch at 1 m. which flowed in on the wright.    our course S. E.    we now entered an extensive open bottom of the Kooskooske R. through which we passed nearly N. about 1½ miles and halted on the bank of the river at the place appointed to meet the canoe.    the man had set out early this morning for the purpose but had not yet arrived with the canoe we therefore unloaded our horses and turned them out to graize.    as the canoe did not arrive untill after sunset we remained here all night; a number of the natives continued with us.    in the evening we tryed the speed of several of our horses.    these horses are active strong and well formed.    these people have immence numbers of them    50, 60 or a hundred hed is not unusual for an individual to possess. The Chopunnish are in general stout well formed active men.    they have high noses and many of them on the acqueline order with cheerfull and agreeable countenances; their complexions are not remarkable.    in common with other savage nations of America they extract their beards but the men do not uniformly extract the hair below, this is more particularly confined to the females. I observed several men among them whom I am convinced if they had shaved their beards instead of extracting it would have been as well supplyed in this particular as any of my countrymen.    they appear to be cheerfull but not gay; they are fond of gambling and of their amusements which consist principally in shooting their arrows at a bowling target made of willow bark, and in riding and exercising themselves on horseback, racing &c.    they are expert marksmen and good riders. they do not appear to be so much devoted to baubles as most of the nations we have met with, but seem anxious always to obtain articles of utility, such as knives, axes, tommahawks, kettles blankets and mockerson alls.    blue beads however may form an exception to this remark; this article among all the nations of this country may be justly compared to goald or silver among civilized nations. They are generally well cloathes in their stile.    their dress consists of a long shirt which reaches to the middle of thye, long legings which reach as high as the waist, mockersons, and robes.    these are formed of various skins and are in all rispects like those particularly discribed of the Shoshones.    their women also dress like the Shoshones.    their ornaments consist of beads shells and peices of brass variously attatched to their dress, to their ears arrond their necks wrists arms &c.    a bando of some kind usually surrounds the head, this is most frequently the skin of some fir animal as the fox otter &c. tho' they have them also of dressed skin without the hair.    the ornament of the nose is a single shell of the wampum.    the pirl and beads are suspended from the ears.    beads are woarn arround their wrists necks and over their sholders crosswise in the form of a double sash.    the hair of the men is cewed in two rolls which hang on each side in front of the body as before discribed of other inhabitants of the Columbia.    collars of bears claws are also common; but the article of dress on which they appear to bstow most pains and ornaments is a kind of collar or brestplate; this is most comonly a strip of otterskin of about six inches wide taken out of the center of the skin it's whole length including the head.    this is dressed with the hair on; a hole is cut lengthwise through the skin near the head of the animal sufficiently large to admit the head of the person to pass.    thus it is placed about the neck and hangs in front of the body the tail frequently reaching below their knees; on this skin in front is attatched peices of pirl, beads, wampum peices of red cloth and in short whatever they conceive most valuable or ornamental. I observed a tippit woarn by Hohâstillpilp, which was formed of human scalps and ornamented with the thumbs and fingers of several men which he had slain in battle.    their women brade their hair in two tresses which hang in the same position of those of the men.    they also wear a cap or cup on the head formed of beargrass and cedar bark.    the men also frequently attatch some small ornament to a small plat of hair on the center of the crown of their heads
ClarkTuesday 13th May 1806.
a fine morning    I administered to the Sick and gave directions.    we collected all our horses and Set out at 1 P. M. and proceeded down the Creek to the Flat head River a Short distance below the enterance of the Creek at the distance of 3 miles from the Village.    at this place we expected to have met the Canoe which was promised to be furnished us, and for which an indian Set out very early this morning.    we halted at the Flat Head River unloaded our horses and turnd. them out to feed. Several Indians accompanied us to the river and Continued untill evening. The man who Set out early this morning to the forks of this river for a Canoe and was to meet us at this place.    as the Canoe did not arive untill after Sun set we remained all night; in the evening we tried the Speed of Several of our horses.    these horses are strong active and well formed.  Those people have emence numbers of them 50 or 60 or a Hundred head is not unusial for an individual to possess.
The Chopunnish are in general Stout well formd active men.    they have high noses and maney of them on he acqueline order with chearfull and agreeable countinances; their complexions are not remarkable.    in common with other Indian Nations of America they extract their beard, but the men do not uniformly extract the hair below, this is more particularly confined to the females.    they appear to be cheerfull but not gay; they are fond of gambling and of their amusements which consists principally in shooting their arrows at a targit made of Willow bark, and in rideing and exersiseing themselves on horsback, raceing &c.    they are expirt marks men & good riders.    they do not appear to be So much devoted to baubles as most of the nations we have met with, but Seen anxious always to riceve articles of utility, Such as knives, axes, Kittles, blankets & Mockerson awls.    blue beeds however may form an exception to this remark; This article among all the nations of this Country may be justly compared to gold and Silver among civilized nations. They are generally well clothed in their Stile.    their dress Consists of a long shirt which reaches to the middle of leg, long legins which reach as high as the waist, mockersons & robe.    those are formed of various skins and are in all respects like those of the Shoshone. Their orniments consists of beeds, Shells and peices of brass variously attached to their dress, to their ears arround theire necks wrists arms &c.    a band of Some kind usially Serounds the head, this is most frequently the Skin of Some fer animal as the fox otter &c.; I observed a tippet worn by Hohâstillpilp, which was formed of Humane Scalps and ornemented with the thumbs and fingers of Several men which he had Slain in battle.    they also were a coller or breast plate of otter Skin orniminted with Shells beeds & quills.    the women brade their hair in two tresses which hang in the same position of those of the men, which ar Cewed and hang over each sholder.    &c

Ordway
Tuesday 13th of May 1806.    a clear frosty morning.    we collected all our horses 60 in number now together and all good except 4 which has Sore backs, &C.    a number of the natives went at playing the game as those below    had considerable property up on each Side Such as beed Strips of otter Skins which was filled with rich Shells, trinkets & Spanish bridles &C &C.    about 12 oClock we set out and proced on down the creek.    a bold runing Stream about 15 yds wide.    considerable of cotton & cherry    servis berry also in the bottoms.    about 4 miles we came to its mouth a handsom low plain rich Soil & timber around    went a short distance down the kooskooskee river and halted to wait for a canoe which we expect the natives to bring us from above this place.    we intend crossing the river here and Camp on the other Side untill Such times as the Snow will admit of our crossing
the mountains.    a number of the natives followed us    we Swapped Several horses with them.


GassTuesday 13th.    We had a fine morning with white frost. Having collected our horses, we found we had 60 and all pretty good except 4, which were studs and had sore backs. At noon we proceeded down the branch, which has a good deal of cotton wood, willow, and cherry tree on its banks; and is a bold rapid stream, about 15 yards wide. We kept down the branch about four miles; and then came to the river where it passes through a beautiful plain.— Here we halted to wait for a canoe, which we expected that some of the natives would bring up the river, to assist us in crossing; when we intended to encamp until the snow shall have sufficiently melted to admit of our crossing the mountains. At dark the canoe came, but it being too late to cross we encamped on the south side.



Down the north bank of Lawyer Creek, in Lewis County, Idaho; not shown on Atlas map 71. Space, 27; Peebles (RLC), 20; Peebles (LT), map.Sevenmile Creek, in Idaho County, Idaho. Space, 27.Just south of present Kamiah, in Lewis County. Ibid., 27.Near the present Kamiah railroad depot, in Lewis County. Ibid., 27.The Clearwater. The word may have been added to a blank space, as too, the next mention.The Indian hand game again.Down the north bank of Lawyer Creek, Lewis County, Idaho.Actually they went up the Clearwater River about 1½ miles and camped at Kamiah,
Lewis County.Any of several varieties of cherry, Prunus sp.The Clearwater River, their Kooskooske.Near the Kamiah railroad depot, Lewis County.