September 24, 1805ClarkSeptr. 24th Monday 1805
Set out early for the river and proceeded on the Same road I had prevsly gorn to the Island at which place I had found the Chief & formed a Camp several 8 or 9 men Sick, Capt Lewis Sick    all Complain of a Lax & heaviness at the Stomack, I gave rushes Pills to Several    hot day    maney Indians & thier gangues of horses follow us    hot day    Hunter had 5 Deer
ClarkSunday [NB: Tuesday] 24th Septr. 1805
a fine morning    collected our horses despatched J. Colter back to hunt the horses lost in the mountains & bring up Some Shot left behind, and at 10 oClock we all Set out for the river and proceeded on by the Same rout I had previously traveled, and at Sunset We arrived at the Island on which I found the Twisted hare and formed a Camp on a large Island a littl below,Capt Lewis Scercely able to ride on a jentle horse which was furnishd by the Chief, Several men So unwell that they were Compelled to lie on the Side of the road for Some time others obliged to be put on horses. I gave rushes Pills to the Sick this evening. Several Indians follow us.
Ordway
Tuesday 24th Sept. 1805.    a clear morning.    we went to look for our horses but found them much Scatered and mixed among the Indian horses which were numerous. Saw a number of Squaws digging commass roots in the plain    the Soil verry rich and lays delightful for cultivation    about 8 oClock A M. we loaded our horses    Several men Sick.    one man Sent back to look for 2 horses which was lost on the road.    we Set out and proceeded on the day warm    we had a good road mostly plain but no water. Some
Scattering pine timber.    towards evening we came down on a fork of Columbia River and followed it down Some distance then went on a small prarie Island and Camped.    our hunters joined us    had got 4 deer and two Sammon which they killed. Several of the natives followed us and Camped near us &C—


GassTuesday 24th.    The morning was fine, and about nine o'clock we set forward on our march towards the river, all but one man who had gone back to look for the horses and another that had remained at the first village. The men are generally unwell, owing to the change of diet. The valley is level and lightly timbered with pine and spruce trees. The soil is thin except in some small plains, where it is of the first quality. The adjacent country appears much the same; except that on the river it is broken with hills and some rocks. In the valley there are great quantities of service-berry bushes. In the evening we arrived at the camp of our hunters on a river about 100 yards broad, a branch of the Columbia. The natives say it is two days march to the great river. We encamped on a small island with our hunters who had killed 5 deer, which was a very pleasing circumstance to us; as the Indian provisions did not agree with us. Captain Clarke gave all the sick a dose of Rush's Pills, to see what effect that would have. We found some of the natives here upon the river fishing.


WhitehouseTuesday 24th Sept. 1805.    a clear pleasant morning.    we went out eairly a hunting our horses, which were Scatered all over the plain.    Saw a vast nomber of horses which belong to the natives, the most of which are in good order and good horses in general.    Saw a nomber of Squaws digging the wild potatoes in the plains.    the Soil verry rich and lays handsom for cultivation.    we loaded up our horses.    one man Sent back in the mountains to look for the 2 horses which was lost    about 8 oClock we Set out and proceeded on.    the day warm.    had a fine road mostly plain, Some Scatering large pitch pine, but little water.    Several of the men Sick, by eating hearty of the Sweet food and Sammon.    towards evening we came on the branch or fork of Columbian River, and followed down it Some distance, and went on a Small prarie Island and Camped.    a hard rapid at the foot of this Island which the natives tell us is the last bad rapid in this fork of River    the hunters joined us with 4 Deer & 2 Sammon which they had killed.    Several of the natives followed after us and Camped with us.    high hills each Side of the River thinly covred with pine but not large enofe for canoes, but we expect to find Some near, So that we may leave our horses in the care of a chief and go down by water to the ocean.—
Tuesday Septemr 24th    A Clear pleasant Morning, & a number of our party were sent out in order to hunt our horses, which were scattered all over the plain.    the party saw vast numbers of horses, which belonged to the 
Natives, some of which were very elegant, most of these horses were in very good order.    They also saw numbers of Indian women, who were employed in digging the bread Root, or wild potatoes in the plain, They found the Soil extreamly Rich, & the Land lay handsomely for Cultivation.—
The party that were sent out to collect our horses returned, they had found them all but one.    We loaded them, & sent back one of our party to the Mountains in order to find the 2 horses that was lost.    About 8 o'Clock 
A. M we proceeded on our Journey, the day grew warm & we found the Road extreamly good it being mostly a plain with some large scattering pitch pine Trees, growing on them; & but little water to be found, in them,—    Several 
of our party was taken sick on the Road, which was occasion'd by eating too hearty of the bread & Salmon that we got from the Indians.    Towards evening we arrived at <the> another fork of Columbia River, and followed down it some distance, and went on a small Island of Priari land and encamped.    At the foot of this Island lay a bad rapid, which the Natives informed us, is the last bad rapid in this fork of Columbia River.    The hunters had went a head of us this day, & they all join'd us at this place, they had killed 4 deer & 2 Salmon which they brought to us.—    Several of the Natives followed us from the last Village, and came & encamped with us.—
The land on both sides of this fork is hilly, and is thinly covered with Pine Trees, but none of them large enough to make Canoes, but we all expect lower down the fork a short distance that we may find some to answer that purpose.    Our Officers concluded to leave our horses in the care of some of the Indian Chiefs, & to ascend the River to the Mouth of the Columbia River, provided we can procure timber to make Canoes of.—




Just below Twisted Hair's camp, which Clark first reached on September 21, 1805, on what was China Island of the Clearwater River, about a mile above Orofino, Clearwater County, Idaho. Space, 19; Peebles (LT), 10; Atlas map 71.Presumably the result of the change of diet, and perhaps bacteria on the dried salmon. Cutright (LCPN), 217–19; Chuinard (OOMD), 321.Colter, according to Clark.Clearwater River, Clearwater County, Idaho.Later China Island, on the Clearwater River about a mile above Orofino, Clearwater
County, Idaho.