August 1, 1804ClarkAugust the 1st 1804    a fair morning, Sent out two men after the horses & one back to examine if the Indians have been there, [blank] Beever Cought last night, the air is Cool and pleasingEqual altitudes & magnetic Azmothazmthaltd.Time      m     s h.     m     s.Comp. N. 86° E. 68° 47' 15"= A. M.7    52    55P.M.3    50    42   "    54    20 "    52      3   "    55    47 "    53    31
Prepared the Pipe of Peace verry flashey.    wind rose at 10 oClock and blowed from W. S. W.    very pleasent all day    Several men geathering grapes &c.    two men after the horses which Strayed the night before last.    those Praries produce the Blue Current Common in the U. S.    the Goose Berry Common in the U. S, two Kind of Honeysuckle, the Bush which I have Seen in Kentucky, with a paile Pink flower, also one which grow in Clusters about 4 or 5 feet high bearing a Short flour in clusters of the like Colour.    the leaves Single.    3 Deer & an Elk Killed to day. This being my birth day I order'd a Saddle of fat Vennison, an Elk fleece & a Bevertail to be cooked and a Desert of Cheries, Plumbs, Raspberries Currents and grapes of a Supr. quallity.    The Indians not yet arrived.    a Cool fine eveninge    Musquetors verry troublesom, the Praries Contain Cheres, Apple, Grapes, Currents, Rasp burry, Gooseberris Hastlenuts and a great Variety of Plants & flours not Common to the U S. What a field for a Botents [botanist] and a natirless [naturalist]Clark
August the 1st 1804    a fair morning    Despatched two men after the horses lost yesterday, one man back to the place from which the messinger was Sent for the Ottoes to See if any Indians was or had been there Since our deptr.    he return'd and informed that no person had been there Sence we left it. The Prarie which is Situated below our Camp is above the high water leavel and rich Covered with Grass from 5 to 8 feet high intersperced with Copse of Hazel, Plumbs, Currents (like those of the U.S.) Rasberries & Grapes of Dift. Kinds.    also produceing a Variety of Plants and flowers not Common in the United States, two Kind of honey Suckle one which grows to a kind of Srub. Common about Harrods burgh in Kentucky    the other are not So large or tall and bears a flow[er] in Clusters Short and of a light Pink Colour, the leaves differ from any of the othe Kind in as much as the Lieves are Distinkd & does not Surround the Stalk as all the other Kind does
one Elk and three Deer Killed to day also two Beever Cought
The wind rose at 10 oClock from the W. S. W. and blew a Steedy and agreeable Breeze all Day.
The Musqutors verry troublesom this evening in the bottoms.
Took equal altitudes to day and the azmuth with the Commencement of the A. M.Time of alt'd  h    m    s      h    m    sN. 86°EA M7    52    55 P M3    50    42 "7    54    20 " 3    52      3 "7    55    47 "3    53    31             
The Altitude given 68° 47' 15"
The Indians not yet arrived    we fear Something amiss with our Messinger or them.LewisWednesday August 1st
Observed meridian Altd. of ☉'s L. L. with Octant by the back observtn.    51° 29' 30" 
Observed Equal Altitudes of the ☉ with Sextant. h      m      s  h    m    sA. M.7    52    55     P. M.3    50    42 "    54    20  "    52	     3 "    55    47  "    53    31Altitude given by Sextant at the time of this observation 68°    47'    15"☉'s Magnetic azimuth by Circumferenter N. 86° E.  h       m       sTime by ChronometerA. M.7       52     55Altitude by Sextant of ☉'s U.L. 68°    47'    15"Latitude of place deduced from two
observtns. of ☉'s Merdn. altd. being as
mean of the same 
41°    17'    0.2" OrdwayAugust 1st 1804 Wednesday.    a fair morning.    2 men out hunting    the Horses not found.    1 large bever caught last night in G. Drewyers trap. Drewyer went to hunt for the Horses. Shields went out a short time and killed & brought in a Deer; the wind from S. E. Jo. Fields killed & brought in a Deer. George Gibson killed a fat Buck brought in the Skin & Tallow & Some of the meat &C.—Floyd
		
Wendesday august 1th 1804    Lay by all this day expecting the Indianes every ouer    Sent George Draugher out to Hunt ouer Horses    Sent one man Down the River to whare we eat Diner on the 28th of July to See if aney Indianes <were> Had been thare    He Returnd and Saw no Sigen of them

GassWednesday 1st Aug. 1804.    Three of our men again went out to hunt the horses, but returned without them. They brought a deer, and two of our other hunters killed two more.

Whitehouse
Wendy August 1st    the Morning was Clear    G. Druire & Colter went to look for the horses that was lost on the 30th of last month; G. Gibson was Sent back One Days Journey to See if the Indians came there with Liberty that was Sent for them to come to a Treaty with Captn. Lewis & Wm. Clark at the Camp of the Brareowes—    Shields Kill One Deer    Gibson returnd but did not see liberty or the Indians there
Wednesday August 1st    This morning was clear, we remain'd still at our encampment; the Captains sent two of our hunters out, in Order to hunt for the two horses that was lost; and one Man who was to proceed one days Journey back, in order to see if the Zoto Indians, had come with the frenchman Liberty, in Order to hold a treaty with them.—    We named this place, the Camp of Brareowes the name of the unknown animal that we had brought to us by our Hunters.—
Two of our hunters returned, with one deer they had kill'd, but had not seen Liberty or the Zoto Indians on their route.—

Whitehouse records that Drouillard and Colter went after the horses, while Gibson went to look for the Otos and a La Liberté.The Blue Current is Ribes americanum Mill., wild black currant, which has an eastern United States distribution as Clark mentions. Fernald, 751; Barkley, 134. The two kinds of "honeysuckle" are not true honeysuckle species, since no native Lonicera fits the description here. They are likely Symphoricarpos occidentalis Hook., wolfberry, western snowberry, which was new to Clark, and S. orbiculatus Moench, coralberry, Indian-currant, buckbrush, with which Clark was familiar in Kentucky. Fernald, 1336; Barkley, 328–29.Clark interlined this entire sentence later. It was his thirty-fourth birthday.Harrodsburg, in Mercer County in central Kentucky, was named for James Harrod, an early settler. Stewart (APN), 198.Biddle apparently has drawn a red line through the passage beginning "also producing" to here.Lewis's observation from Codex O.Gibson, according to Whitehouse.According to Ordway's journal, Shields, Joseph Field, and George Gibson brought in 
deer, but only Drouillard was out looking for the horses. Whitehouse has Drouillard and  
John Colter looking for horses and Gibson looking for the Otos and La Liberté. Clark does not 
name any of the men.Whitehouse, along with Ordway, uses this name for the Council Bluff camp.