May 13, 1805LewisMonday May 13th 1805.
The wind continued to blow so violently this morning that we did not think it prudent to set out.    sent out some hunters. At 1 P. M. the wind abated, and altho' the hunters had not all returned we set out; the courant reather stronger than usual and the water continues to become reather clearer, from both which I anticipate a change of Country shortly.    the country much the same as yesterday; but little timber in the bottoms and a scant proportion of pine an cedar crown the Stard. hills.    Capt C. who was on shore the greater part of the day killed a mule and a Common deer, the party killed several deer and some Elk principally for the benefit of their skins which are necessary to them for cloathing, the Elk skins I now begin to reserve for making the leather boat at the falls.    the hunters joined us this evening; Gibson had wounded a very large brown bear but it was too late in the evening to pursue him.Courses and distances May 13th 1805.S 35° W.along the Stard. shore to a point of high timber opposite to
a bluff, passing the entrance of two Creeks on Lard.    1st
18 2cd 30 yards wide neither discharging any water at
present1 ½S. 50° W.Along the Stard. point opposite to a high blf.1N. 75° W.to a point of woodland on the Lard. side2S. 80° W.Along the Lard. shore to a point of wood land near which
we encamped on Lard. shore2 ½ Miles7Point of Observation No. 18.
At our encampment of this evening on Lard. side observed time and distance of ☽'s Western limb from Antares; ★ East with Sextant.—Mean of sundry Observations. Time Distance h    m    s  P. M.11    51    18.4 39°    10'    30"Clark13th of May Monday 1805
The wind Continued to blow hard untill one oClock P M. to day at which time it fell a little and we Set out and proceeded on verry well about 9 miles and Camped on the Lard Side.    the countrey much the Same appearance as yesterday but little timber in the bottoms; Some Pine in places on the Stard. Hills. I killed two deer this evening one a mule deer & the other a common Deer, the party killed Several this morning all for the use of their Skins which are now good, one man Gibson wounded a verry large brown bear, too late this evening to prosue him—    We passed two Creeks in a bend to the Lard Side neither them had any water, milesCourse & Distance 13th of May 1805S. 35° W.1 ½along the Std. Shore to a point of high timber opposit a
bluff, passing the enterence of two Creeks on the L. S.
neither of which discharge any water at this time.    1st 18
2d 30 yds wideS 50° W.1along the Std. point oppsd. a high bluffN. 75° W.2to a point of wood land on the Lard. SideS. 80° W2 ½along the Lard Shore to a point of wood land near which
we incamped on the Lard Sidemiles7 OrdwayMonday 13th May 1805.    the wind blew verry hard all last night. Some
Sprinkling rain and high wind this morning. Some men out hunting    about
one oC. P M the wind abated So that we Set off though the hunters had not
all returned.    the afternoon pleasant.    we proceeded on    passed the bottoms and bluffs on each Side    passed the mouths of three creeks 2 on S. S.
and one on the N. S.    we came 9 miles and Camped in a large bottom on S. S.    the hunters all joined    had killed several Elk & deer and wounded a
brown bear on the hills.    the current Swift (came 9 mls.)


GassMonday 13th    The weather continued stormy, and some few drops of rain 
fell. At 1 P. M. we embarked; passed three creeks, one on the North side and 
two on the South; went seven miles and encamped in a large bottom.


Whitehouse
Monday 13th May 1805.    the wind blew hard all last night.    Some rain 
high wind and Squawls of rain this morning, So that we did not Set off eairly.    
Some men went out hunting and killed Several Elk and deer.    about 2 oC. 
p. m. the weather cleared off pleasant.    the wind abated and we Set off    
Some of the hunters had not returned.    we proceeded on    the current 
Swift    passed hills on each Side which make near the River only the bottoms 
on the points & in the bends.    came 9 miles and Camped in a bottom on S. S.    the hunters joined us one of them had wounded a white or brown 
bear.    we passed a creek at the lower end of this bottom, the Current verry 
Swift in the Missourie.    came about 9 miles this day.
Monday May 13th    The wind continued blowing hard all last night, and 
this morning, we had Squalls of rain, & high wind, which occasioned our not 
setting off Early,—    some of our Men went out hunting, and killed several 
Elk and deer—    about 2 o'Clock P. M. the weather cleared off & became 
pleasant, and the wind abated.—    We then set off and proceeded on our 
Voyage, (some of the hunters that went out this morning had not returned 
to us,) the current of the River running very swift, we passed some hills, 
which make in, near to the River, the bottom land being only on the points, 
and in the bends of the River, We came 9 Miles, and encamped in a bottom, 
lying on the South side of the River    At the lower end of this bottom <is> 
Run a large creek, Our hunters joined us here with the game that they had 
killed, One of the hunters had wounded a brown bear, but he did not get 
him, The current running very Strong in the Mesouri at this place—



Also given on Atlas map 38, in Lewis's hand.In Garfield County, Montana, on a site now inundated by Fort Peck Reservoir, about one or two miles above the former entrance of today's Crooked Creek (see below). Atlas maps 38, 50, 58; MRC map 66.The first is today's Sheep Creek; the second is later Flirt Creek, today's Crooked Creek, both in Garfield County. Atlas maps 38, 50, 58; MRC map 66; USGS map Fort Peck Lake East.The captains do not mention a creek on the north side, nor does one appear on expedition maps. The two on the south are Sheep and Crooked Creeks, Garfield County, Montana. 
The party camped a mile or two above the latter.