July 19, 1804Clarkof no consequence 3    July 19th    afte[r] breakfast which was on a rosted Ribs of a Deer a little and a little Coffee I walked on Shore intending only to Keep up with the Boat, Soon after I got on Shore, Saw Some fresh elk Sign, which I was induced to prosue those animals by their track to the hills    after assending and passing thro a narrow Strip of wood Land, Came Suddenly into an open and bound less Prarie, I Say bound less because I could not See the extent of the plain in any Derection, the timber appeared to be confined to the River Creeks & Small branches, this Prarie was Covered with grass about 18 Inches or 2 feat high and contained little of any thing else, except as before mentioned on the River Creeks &c, This prospect was So Sudden & entertaining that I forgot the object of my prosute and turned my attention to the Variety which presented themselves to my view    after continueing on the rise for Some minits, I deturmined to make my course to a line of woods to S: E.    I found in this wood a butifull Streem of running water, in prosuing it down Several others Joined it and at 3 miles fell into the river between 2 clifts, I went up & under one clift of dark rich Clay for ½ me.    above this a Clay bank which had sliped in    her[e] I found Sand Stone Containing Iron ore, this ore appears to be inbeded under the Clay just above the waterClarkCourse Distance & reffers.North     ¼me. to the Lower pt. of a Isd on L. S.    called Bakers oven (1)N 10° W  1   ms. to a pt on the L. S.    bad Sand bars    psd. the 2
Isds. (1)N 45° W  1me. on the L. Side    Sand bar on S. S.N. 85° W  2me. S. S. opsd. high land (2)—    a Sand bar on the
S. Side in a bendN 82 W.     ¾Me. to the mouth of a Creek in a bend on L. side
Above a CliftN. 13 W  2 ½me. to Pt. L. S. psd. a Sliped in bank (3)    a Isd. on
the S. S.    a run L. S.N. 54° W  3ms. to pt. on S. S. opsd. Some Clifts, passed a willow
Isld. in midl.    a Deep bend to the L. S. a large Sand
bar on L. S. (4)10 ¾July 19th Thursday 1804

Set out early    pass between 2 Islands one in mid: & the other L. S. opsd. wher Prarie aproaches the river S. S. This place is called the Bakers oven or in french Four le Tour tere    passd. Some high lands 4½ ms. above the Isds. on the L. S. forming a Clift to the river of yellow earth, on the top a Prarie, passd. many a bad Sand bar in this distance, & the river wide & Shallow, above this Clift 2 Small butiffull runs Come from the Plains & fall into the river, a Deer lick on the first, above those two Creeks, I found in my walk on Shore Some ore in a bank which had Sliped in to the river ¾ me. above the Creeks, I took a cerequite around & found that those two runs mentioned contained a good proposion of wood Surrounded by a plain, with grass about 18 Inchs. high, [(]Capt Lewis walked on Shore after Dinner)    in the first bind to the right above those Runs passed a Small Island opsd. is a Sand bar    I call this Island Butter Island, as at this place we mad use of the last of our butter, as we approach this Great River Platt the Sand bars are much more noumerous than they were, and the quick & roleing Sands much more danjerous, where the Praries aproach the river it is verry wide, the banks of those Plains being much easier to undermine and fall than the wood land    passed (4) a willow Island Situated near the middle of the river, a Sand bar on the S. S. and a Deep bend to the L S.    camped on the right Side of the Willow Island—    W. Bratten hunting on the L. S Swam to the Island. Hunters Drewyer killed 2 Deer, Saw great numbers of young gees. The river Still falling a little    Sand bars thick    always in view.ClarkJuly 19th, Thursday 1804
Set out early    passed between two Small Islands, one in the middle of the river, the other Close on the L S. opposit a prarie S. S. Called (1) by the french Four le tourtre, The Bakers oven Islands, passed (2) Some high Clifts 4½ miles above the Islands on the L. S. <forming> of yellow earth    passed Several <bad> Sand bars that were wide and at one place verry Shallow (two Small butifull runs falls into the river near each other at this Clift, a Deer Lick 200 yards up the Lowest of those runs[)]    Those runs head at no great distance in the plains and pass thro: [NB: Skirts] or timber to the river. In my walk on Shore I found Some ore in the bank above those runs which I take to be Iron ore (3)    at this place the Side of the hill has Sliped about half way into the river for ¾ of a Mile forming a Clift from the top of the hill above. In the first  bend to the right passed a Small Island a Sand bar opposit,—    worthey of remark as we approach this great River Plate the Sand bars much more numerous and the quick or moveing Sands much worst than they were below    at the places where Praries approach the river it is verry wide those places being much easier to wash & under Mine than the wood Land's.    (4) passed a Willow Isd. Situated near the Middle of the river and a large Sand makeing out from the S. S.    a Deep bend to the L S.    we Camped at the head of this Island on the Starboard Side of it, Hunters Killed Two Deer. Saw great numbers of young Gees    River falling a little.Course Distance & refrs. July 19thNorth	     ¼of a me. to Lowr. pt. of a Isd. L. S. (1)N 10° W  1 ¼ms. to pt. on L. S. Sand bar    psd. Isd. (1)N. 45° W  1me. on the L. S.    a Sand bar on S. S.N. 85° W.  2ms. to pt. on S. S. opsd. High land (2)N. 82° W.     ¾me. to the Mo: of a run in bend L. S. (3)N 13° W.  2 ½ms. to pt. L. S.    psd. Sliped bank (3)    a Island
on S. S. a run L. S.N. 54° W.3ms. to a pt. on S. S. opsd. Some Clifts    passd.
a Will. Isd. in midl.    a Deep bend on the
L. S.    a Sand bar S. S. (4)10 ¾Lewis(Point of observation No. 23.)
Thursday July 19th
Under a bold Bluff on Lard. shore, opposite to the Stard. point terminateing the 4th course of this day.—
Observed Meridian Altd. of ☉'s L. L. with Octant by back observation     44° 15' —
Latitude deduced from this obsert.    40° 29' 50"



Ordway
Thursday July 19th 1804.    we Set out eairly.    between 2 Islands passed a place called Bakers oven & an Island called Bakers Island.    we passed the mouth of a Small creek in a bend above high clifts on the South Side    passed high land along the South Side forming clifts to the river of yallow earth.    praries on the top.    we Saw Some Signs of Elk.    we gethered a quantity of cherries at noon time & put in to the Whisky barrel    we proceded on    passed Several Sand bars & Islands and we camped on the north Side of an a willow Island which is in a round bend of the river. G. Drewyer Joined us with 2 Deer this evening. Bratton also.    he found Callimous opposite where we camped & a large quantity.    (Sweet flag we call it)

Floyd
Thursday July 19th    we Set out errly this morning    prosed on    passed a Run on the South Side    Has no name we Called Cherry Run    the Land is High Cliefts and <bore> pore whare a Grate nomber of thos Cherres    <frute groe> thay Gro on Low Bushes about as High as a mans hed    Came 9 miles    past Several Isd.    water Strong    Campt on the South Side on a Small willow Isd. near the South Side    the Land on the N. is Low Land    that on the South is High prarie Land


GassThursday 19th.    At sunrise we renewed our voyage, and passed a number of sand bars, and high land on the south side. Where we halted for dinner we found a great quantity of cherries, called by some choak-cherries. We encamped for the night on an island of Willows.

Whitehouse
Thursday 19th    Got on under way    the Morning was Clear    passd. 4 Islands to our Stabourd    as we came along Shore there was two large Cat fish had hold of Each other Could not get off    one of the french men Shot the two the first Shot.    On the W. Shore at Butter run, the men pulld a Great Quantity of wild Cherrys    put them in the Barrel of whisky.    Roed. 12 Miles    Campd. on an Island neer the River Calld. the Crying Water—
Thursday July 19th    We got under Way this morning, having clear weather, and passed 4 Islands on our way, laying on the No. East Side of the River, as we passed along the Shore we espy'd two of the largest siz'd catfish, which had hold of each other, One of the Canadian french Men, shot at and kill'd one of them on the So. Western side of the River & wounded the other, which we got also, we landed & found a great quantity of Wild cherries, we gather'd a Quantity of them, which we put into a barrell of Whiskey, we proceeded on at 3oClock P.M. <we proceeded on> & encamped on an Island called the crying Island, & near a River call'd the crying Water, distance come this day 12 miles.—


These words occur immediately in front of the date in the Field Notes (document 32). There is no apparent connection to the July 18 entry above or to anything else. Since there is a second, separate Field Notes entry for this date, Clark may have intended to indicate that there was nothing important in this first one. There is a course overwritten to one side of this entry: N 54° W.In his Codex A entry and the second Field Notes entry, below, Clark indicates that there were two creeks. They are probably North Table Creek and South Table Creek, which reach the Missouri River at Nebraska City, Otoe County, Nebraska. MRC map 21; MRR maps 59, 60.See July 18, 1804, n. 3.This is a second entry for July 19, or a continuation of the first, on a separate sheet (document 33) of the Field Notes. Biddle's notation at the top of this sheet reads, "July 19 to 21." Clark divided the text around the course material. Here the text is brought together for ease of reading.Probably in Fremont County, Iowa, two to three miles upstream and opposite present Nebraska City. MRC map 21; MRR map 60.Biddle apparently placed brackets around the phrase "by the french Four le tourtre" and then crossed it out, all in red ink.South Table Creek.Lewis's observation from Codex O.In the vicinity of Nebraska City, Otoe County, Nebraska; see Clark's entry for July 18.Either North Table Creek or South Table Creek, both of which reach the Missouri River at Nebraska City.The enlisted men all mention the cherries, perhaps because they added them to their whiskey barrel. It is probably choke cherry, Prunus virginiana L., as Gass indicates.Ordway is the only writer to mention William Bratton's observation of sweet flag, Acorus calamus L. The final, parenthetical phrase may not be in Ordway's hand.Floyd is the only person to apply this name to either North Table Creek or South Table Creek.Only Whitehouse mentions this incident; perhaps the fish were channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus.Yet another name mentioned only by Whitehouse; probably either North Table Creek or South Table Creek, both entering the Missouri at Nebraska City, Otoe County, Nebraska.