January 18, 1806LewisSunday [NB: Saturday]
January 18th 1806.
Two of the Clatsops who were here yesterday returned today for a dog they had left; they remained with us a few hours and departed.    no further occurrence worthy of relation took place.    the men are still much engaged in dressing skins in order to cloath themselves and prepare for our homeward journey. The ClatsopsChinnooks &c construct their houses of timber altogether.    they are from 14 to 20 feet wide and from 20 to 60 feet in length, and acommodate one or more families sometimes three or four families reside in the same room.    thes houses a[re] also divided by a partition of boards, but this happens only in the largest houses as the rooms are always large compared with the number of inhabitants.    these houses are constructed in the following manner; two or more posts of split timber agreeably to the number of divisions or partitions are furst provided, these are sunk in the ground at one end and rise perpendicularly to the hight of 14 or 18 feet, the tops of them are hollowed in such manner as to receive the ends of a round beam of timber which reaches from one to the other, most commonly the whole length of the building, and forming the upper part of the roof; two other sets of posts and poles are now placed at proper distances on either side of the first, formed in a similar manner and parrallel to it; these last rise to the intended hight of the eves, which is usually about 5 feet.    smaller sticks of timber are now provided and are placed by pares in the form of rafters, resting on, and reaching from the lower to the upper horizontal beam, to both of which they are attatched at either end with the cedar bark; two or three ranges or small poles are now placed horizontally on these rafters on each side of the roof and are secured likewise with strings of the Cedar bark.    the ends sides and partitions are then formed with one range of wide boards of abut two inches thick, which are sunk in the ground a small distance at their lower ends and stand erect with their upper ends laping on the outside of the eve poles and end rafters to which they are secured by an outer pole lying parallel with the eve poles and rafters being secured to them by chords of cedar bark which pass through wholes made in the boards at certain distances for that purpose; the rough [roof] is then covered with a double range of thin boards, and an aperture of 2 by 3 feet left in the center of the roof to permit the smoke to pass.    these houses are sometimes sunk to the debth of 4 or 5 feet in which cace the eve of the house comes nearly to the surface of the earth.    in the center of each room a space of six by eight feet square is sunk about twelve inches lower than the floor having it's sides secured with four sticks of squar timber, in this space they make their fire, their fuel being generally pine bark.    mats are spread arround the fire on all sides, on these they set in the day and frequently sleep at night.    on the inner side of the hose on two sides and sometimes on three, there is a range of upright peices about 4 feet removed from the wall; these are also sunk in the ground at their lower ends, and secured at top to the rafters, from these other peices ar extended horizontally to the wall and are secured in the usual method by bark to the upright peices which support the eve poles.    on these short horizontal pieces of which there are sometimes two ranges one above the other, boards are laid, which either form ther beads, or shelves on which to put their goods and chattles of almost every discription.    their uncured fish is hung on sticks in the smoke of their fires as is also the flesh of the Elk when they happen to be fortunate enough to procure it which is but seldom.—
ClarkMonday [Saturday] 18th January 1806
Two of the Clatsops that were here yesterday returned to day for a Dog they had left; they remained with us a fiew hours and departed.    no further accounts worthey of relation took place.    the men are much engaged dressing Skins in order to Cloath themselves and prepare for the homeward journey.
The ClatsopsChinnooks &c. construct their Houses of timber altogether.    they are from 14 to 20 feet wide, and from 20 to 60 feet in length, and accomodate one or more families    Sometimes three or four families reside in the Same room.    this house is also devided by petitions of Boards, but this happens only in the largest houses, as the rooms are always large Compared with the number of inhabitents.    those houses are Constructed in the following manner; two or more posts of Split timber agreeably to the number of devisions or partitions are first provided, these are Sunk in the ground at one end and raised pirpindicular to the hight of 12 or 14 feet, the top of them are hollowed So as to recive the end of a round beem of timber which reaches from one to the other or the entire length of the house; and forming the ridge pole; two other Sets of posts and poles are then placed at proper distancies on either Side of the first, formed in a Similar manner and parrelal to it; those last rise to the intended hight of the eves, which is usially about 5 feet,—    Smaller Sticks of timber is then previded and are placed by pears in the form of rafters, resting on, and reaching from the lower to the upper horizontial beam, to both of which they are atached at either end with the Cedar bark; two or 3 ranges of Small poles are then placed Horizontially on these rafters on each Side of the roof & are Secured likewise with Cedar bark.    the ends, Sides, and partitions are then formed, with one range of wide boards of aout 2 inches thick, which are Sunk in the ground a Small distance at their lower ends & Stands erect with their upper ends lapping on the out Side of the eve poles and end rafters to which they are Secured by a outer pole lyeing parrelal with the eve pole and rafters being Secured to them by Cords of Cedar bark which pass through wholes made in the bods at Certain distances for that purpose; the rough [roof] is then Covered with a double range of thin boards, and an aperture of 2 by 3 feet left in the Center of the roof to admit the Smoke to pass. These houses are commonly Sunk to the debth of 4 or 5 feet in which Case the eve of the house comes nearly to the Surface of the earth.    in the Center of each room a Space of from 6 by 8 feet is Sunk about 12 inches lower than the floar haveing its Sides Secured by four thick boards or Squar pieces of timber, in this Space they make their fire, their fuel being generally dry pine Split Small which they perform with a peice of an Elks horn Sharpened at one end rove into the wood with a Stone.  mats are Spred around the fire on all Sides, on these they Sit in the day and frequently Sleep at night.    on the inner Side of the house on two Sides and Sometimes on three, there is a range of upright pieces about 4 feet removed from the wall; these are also Sunk in the ground a[t] their lower end, and Secured at top to the rafters, from those, other pieces are extended horozontially to the wall and are Secured in the usial manner with bark to the upright pieces which Support the eve pole.    on these Short horizontial peices of which there are Sometimes two ranges one above the other, boards are laid, which either form their beads, or Shelves on which to put their goods and Chattles, of almost every discription.    their uncured fish is hung on Sticks in the Smoke of their fires as is also the flesh of the Elk when they happen to be fortunate enouguh to precure it which is but Seldom—.

Ordway
Saturday 18th    hard rain all last night, and continues as usal.    2 Indians came to the fort and Stayed a Short time.

GassSaturday 18th.    Last night was very dark; and early in it rain came on and 
continued all night. This day is also wet. Some of the natives visited us and went away in the evening.

Whitehouse
Saturday Janry 18th    It rained hard all last night, & still continued the same this morning, Two Indians came to the fort & staid a short time.    it continued Raining during the whole of this day.

Rectangular plank houses broadly similar to those of the Chinookan peoples were the characteristic form along the Pacific Coast from southern Alaska to northern California. While commonly semi-subterranean, they were sometimes constructed entirely above ground (as among the Wahkiakums, see entry for November 7, 1805). Although varying considerably in terms of construction detail and gross size, the gabled-style Chinookan house was found at least as far north as the Quinaults and as far south as the southern Oregon coast. Olson (TNC), 24–27; Ray (LCEN), 124–26; Hajda, 140–44.A red vertical line begins with the next paragraph and runs nearly to the end of the entry, perhaps placed there by Biddle.