June 30, 1806Lewis and Clark[Weather, June 1806]State of the Koskooskeat ☉ riseDay oftheMonthState ofthe weatherat ☉ riseWind at☉ riseState ofthe weatherat 4 P.M.Wind at4 P.M.raised orfallenFeetInchesand parts1stf a r T & L.S Ef a c	N Wr162edc a c N Wf a cS Er83rdc a f & cS Ec a fS Er64thc a rS. E.f a cN Wr1½5thfS E.fN Wr46thfS. E.fN Wf17thc a rN Wc a f r & hN Wf38thcS Ec a fN Wf79thcS Ef a cN Wf3½10thfS EfN Wf111thfS EfN W12thf a r T LS EfN W13thcS Ec a fN W14thfS EfN W15thcN Wr a f & rN W16thf a cS Ec a fS E17thc a rEc a f & rS E18thc a rEc a r & hS W19thf a cS EfN W20thfS EfN W21stfS EfN W22cdfN WfN W23rdfN WfN W24thfN Wf a cN W25thc a rS Ec a rN W26thc a rS EfS E27thf a r & T.S EfS E28thf.S EfS E29thfS Ef a r h & T.S E30thfS EfN W[Remarks]1stabout dark last evening had a slight rain from a heavy thunder cloud
which passed to the E & N. E. of us.2ndhave slept comfortably for several nights under one blankett ony. The
river from sunrise untill 10 A. M. yesterday raised 1½ inches; from
that [t]ime untill dark fell 4½, and in the course of the last night
raised again 8 Inches as stated in the diary.    the Indians inform us
that the present rise of the river is the greatest which it annually takes,
and that when the water now subsides to about the hight it was when
we arrived here the mountains will be passable. I have no doubt but
that the melting of the mountain snows in the begining of June is
what causes the annual inundation of the lower portion of the Mis-
souri from the 1st to the Middle of July.—3dThe weather has been much warmer for five days past than previ-
ously, particularly the mornings and nights—4thrained greater part of last night but fell in no great quantity—    yes-
terday the water was at it's greatest hight at noon, between which and
dark it fell 15 inches and in the course of the night raised 1½ inches
as stated in the diary.    from the indian information the river will now
subisde and may therefore be said to have been at it's greatest annual
hight on the 3rd inst. at noon.—5thlast night was colder than usual but no frost.—    the river fell 3½
inches in the course of the day and raised 4 I. last night as [s]tated in
the diary.    this fluctuating state of the river no doubt is caused by the
influence of the sun in the course of the day on the snows of the
mountains; the accession of water thus caused in the day dose not
reach us untill night when it produces a rise in the river.— The wild
roots is in blume.    the river fell 10 Ins. in the course of this day.6thin the course of the last night the river raised a little but fell by
morning 1 inch lower than what it stood at last evening.    the seven
bark and the yellow vining honeysuckle are just in blume.    a few of
the does have produced their young.    strawberries ripe near the
river—7thrain but slight both last evening and today.    but little hail tho' large.
The river fell three inches last night and 7 yesterday. The goose
berries fully grown also the servis berry.8thriver fell 8 In. in the course of yesterday    7 last night9thriver fell 9 In. yesterday.10th   do    fell 5 ½ in. couse of yesterday    having left the river today I
could not longer keep it's state; it appears to be falling fast and will
probably in the course of a few days be as low as when we first arrived
there.    it is now about 6 feet lower than it has been.11that the quawmash Flats12thslight sprinkle of rain in the forepart of the night.—13thThe days for several past have been warm, the Musquetoes trouble-
some15thit began to rain at 7 A.M. and continued by showers untill 5 P.M.16thon the tops of the hills the dog tooth violet is just in bloom    grass
about 2 inches high    small Huckkleberry just puting fourth it's
leaves &c.17thrained slightly a little after sunset    air cool.    rained from 1 to 3 P.M.18thobliged to return.19threturned to quawmash flats.22edhard frost this morning tho' no ice. Strawberries ripe at the Quaw-
mash flats, they are but small and not abundant.—23rdhard frost this morning    ice one eighth of an inch thick on standing
water24thSet out a 2d time from quawmash flats25thrained a little last night, some showers in the evening—26thSlight rain in the fore part of the last evening—27thThunder shower last <the> evening    some rain a little before dark last
evening.28thnights are cool in these mountains but no frost.29thnight cold    hard frost this morning.    the quawmash and Straw-
berries are just begining to blume at the flatts on the head of theKooskooske.    The Sun flower also just beginning to blume, which
is 2 months later than those on the Sides of the Western Mountains
near the falls of Columbia.30thWe are here Situated on Clarks river in a Vally between two high
mountains of Snow.Lewis's weather table for June 1806 appears in Codex L, pp. 147, 149 (reading backwards); Clark's is in Codex M, pp. 151–52 (reading backwards). The present version follows Lewis, noting any significant variations in Clark.Clark does not have any information on the state of the Clearwater (Kooskooske) River; Lewis ceased recording it after they left the river on June 10.Clark has only "f."Clark has only "f. a. r."Both captains have remarks in the margins of their weather tables and separately. Lewis's version appears here, but there are some significant variations in Clark's remarks that are noted.The rest of this sentence is missing in Clark's version; he resumes with "from the indian."The rest of this sentence is missing in Clark's journal; he resumes with "this fluctuating state."Either wild strawberry, Fragaria virginiana Duchesne, or woodland strawberry, F. vesca L. Hitchcock et al., 3:108–9.In his marginal remarks Clark writes, "hot Sultery day." In his separate remarks there is no sentence about strawberries.See gooseberry possibilities at June 10, 1806.Clark adds "& 3½ last night."In his marginal remarks Clark has "R. fell 5½ ins: do. & <2?> 1 ins: last night." "Do." (ditto refers to corresponding word "yesterday" in the remarks for June 9. In his separate remarks Clark says, "The river fell 1 inch last night and I 5½ yesterday." He has no sentence about the data on the river ceasing and resumes with "it appears."Here Clark adds, "left the river and proceeded the quawmash flatts."This marginal remark appears only in Clark's Codex M.Clark adds, "we Set out on the rocky mountains."Clark has no remarks for this day.An obviously impressed Clark adds, "assend a mtn. Snow 15 feet deep on top."This marginal remark appears only in Clark's Codex M.This marginal remark also appears only in Clark's version.Another marginal remark which only Clark has.Clark adds, "in the snowey region."The last two words are not in Clark's version.The remainder of this remark appears only in Clark's separate comments in Codex M.Any one of several species of Helianthus, otherwise not identifiable.The Western Mountains would be the Cascade Range in Oregon and Washington; the falls are the Celilo Falls.Lewis's marginal remark for this date consists of four repetitions of "do" (ditto), indicating a repetition of the June 29 remark "night cold hard frost this morning." He has no other remarks for the day. The sentence is Clark's marginal remark. Clark continues with a lengthy passage in his separate remarks summarizing their experiences crossing the mountains on both the westbound and eastbound trips, "in passing of which we have experienced Cold and hunger of which I Shall ever remember." The passage serves to fill out page 150 in Codex M, which would otherwise have been largely blank. It has been placed with the daily journal entry of June 30, 1806.