April 28, 1806LewisMonday April 28th 1806.
This morning early Yellept brought a very eligant white horse to our camp and presented him to Capt. C. signifying his wish to get a kettle but on being informed that we had already disposed of every kettle we could possibly spear he said he was content with whatever he thought proper to give him. Capt. C. gave him his swoard [NB: For which he had expressed a great desire] a hundred balls and powder and some sall articles with which he appeared perfectly satisfyed.    it was necessary before we entered on our rout through the plains where we were to meet with no lodges or resident indians that we should lay in a stock of provision and not depend altogether on the gun.    we directed Frazier to whom we have intrusted the duty of makeing those purchases to lay in as many fat dogs as he could procure; he soon obtained ten.    being anxious to depart we requested the Cheif to furnish us with canoes to pass the river, but he insisted on our remaining with him this day at least, that he would be much pleased if we would conset to remain two or three, but he would not let us have canoes to leave him today.    that he had sent for the Chym nâp'-pos his neighbours to come down and join his people this evening and dance for us.    we urged the necessity of our going on immediately in order that we might the sooner return to them with the articles which they wished but this had no effect, he said that the time he asked could not make any considerable difference. I at length urged that there was no wind blowing and that the river was consequently in good order to pass our horses and if he would furnish us with canoes for that purpose we would remain all night at our present encampment, to this proposition he assented and soon produced us a couple of canoes by means of which we passed our horses over the river safely and hubbled them as usual.    we found a Shoshone woman, prisoner among these people by means of whome and Sahcahgarweah we found the means of conversing with the Wollah-wollahs.    we conversed with them for several hours and fully satisfyed all their enquiries with rispect to ourselves and the objects of our pursuit.    they were much pleased.    they brought several diseased persons to us for whom they requested some medical aid.    one had his knee contracted by the rheumatism, another with a broken arm &c to all of which we administered much to the gratification of those poor wretches.    we gave them some eye-water which I beleive will render them more essential service than any other article in the medical way which we had it in our power to bestoe on them.    [WC?: Cap C Splintered the arm of the man which was broke.]    soar eyes seem to be a universal complaint amonge these people; I have no doubt but the fine sand of these plains and river [NB: fishing on the waters too] contribute much to this disorder.    ulsers and irruptions of the skin on various parts of the body are also common diseases among them.    a little before sunset the Chymnahpos arrived; they were about 100 men and a few women; they joined the Wallahwollahs who were about the same number and formed a half circle arround our camp where they waited very patiently to see our party dance.    the fiddle was played and the men amused themselves with dancing about an hour.    we then requested the Indians to dance which they very cheerfully complyed with; they continued their dance untill 10 at night.    the whole assemblage of indians about 550 men women and children sung and danced at the same time.    most of them stood in the same place and merely jumped up to the time of their music.    some of the men who were esteemed most brave entered the space arrond which the main body were formed in solid column, and danced in a circular manner sidewise.    at 10 P. M. the dance concluded and the natives retired; they were much gratifyed with seeing some of our party join them in their dance.—
ClarkMonday April 28th 1806
This morning early the Great Chief Yel lip pet brought a very eligant white horse to our Camp and presented him to me Signifying his wish to get a kittle but being informed that we had already disposed of every kittle we could possibly Spare he Said he was Content with what ever I thought proper to give him. I gave him my Swoard, 100 balls & powder and Some Small articles of which he appeared perfectly Satisfied.    it was necessary before we entered on our rout through the plains where we were to meet with no lodges or resident Indians that we Should lay in a Stock of provisions and not depend altogether on the gun.    we derected R. Frazer to whome we have intrusted the duty of makeing the purchases, to lay in as maney fat dogs as he could procure; he Soon obtained 10.    being anxious to <go> depart we requested the Cheif to furnish us with Canoes to pass the river, but he insisted on our remaining with him this day at least, that he would be much pleased if we would consent to remain two or 3 days, but he would not let <him> us have Canoes to leave him this day.    that he had Sent for the Chim-na-pums his neighbours to come down and join his people this evening and dance for us. We urged the necessity of our proceeding on imediately in order that we might the Sooner return to them, with the articles which they wishd. brought to them but this had no effect, he Said that the time he asked Could not make any Considerable difference. I at length urged that there was no wind blowing and that the river was consequently in good order to pass our horses and if he would furnish us with Canoes for that purpose we would remain all night at our present encampment, to this proposition he assented and Soon produced a Canoe. I Saw a man who had his knee Contracted who had previously applyed to me for Some Medisene, that if he would fournish another Canoe I would give him Some Medisene.    he readily Consented and went himself with his Canoe by means of which we passed our horses over the river Safely and hobbled them as usial—. We found a Sho Sho ne woman, prisoner among those people by means of whome and Sah-cah gah-weah,Shabono's wife we found means of Converceing with the Wallahwallârs.    we Conversed with them for Several hours and fully Satisfy all their enquiries with respect to our Selves and the Object of our pursute.    they were much pleased.    they brought Several disordered persons to us for whome they requested Some Medical aid.    one had his knee contracted by the Rhumitism (whome is just mentioned above) another with a broken arm &c. to all of whome we administered much to the gratification of those pore wretches, we gave them Some eye water which I believe will render them more esential Sirvece than any other article in the Medical way which we had it in our power to bestow on them Sore eyes Seam to be a <serious> universial Complaint among those people; I have no doubt but the fine Sands of those plains and the river Contribute much to the disorder. The man who had his arm broken had it loosely bound in a peice of leather without any thing to Surport it. I dressed the arm which was broken Short above the wrist & Supported it with broad Sticks to keep it in place, put in a Sling and furnished him with Some lint bandages &c. to Dress it in future.    a little before Sun Set the Chim nah poms arrived; they were about 100 men and a fiew women; they joined the Wallah wallahs who were about 150 men and formed a half Circle arround our camp where they waited verry patiently to See our party dance.    the fiddle was played and the men amused themselves with danceing about an hour.    we then requested the Indians to dance untill 10 at night.    the whole assemblage of Indians about 350 men women and Children Sung and danced at the Same time.    most of them danced in the Same place they Stood and mearly jumped up to the time of their musick. Some of the men who were esteemed most brave entered the Space around which the main body were formed in Solid Column and danced in a Circular manner Side wise.    at 10 P M. the dance ended and the nativs retired; they were much gratified in Seeing Some of our Party join them in their dance.    one of their party who made himself the most Conspicious Character in the dance and Songs, we were told was a Medesene man & Could foretell things.    that he had told of our Comeing into their Country and was now about to Consult his God the moon if what we Said was the truth &c. &c.

Ordway
Monday 28th of April 1806.    a clear pleasant morning.    our Indian guides who are going over the mountains with us inform us that their is a nearer way across the plains to the forks of Lewises river at the entrence of Kooskooske which is a Smooth way and only 3 days march to that place
which is allmost as near again as to follow the river round.    So our officers conclude to cross the river at this place & take the near way. So we purchased 6 dogs from the natives to take with us.    our Intrepters wife found a woman of hir own nation who was a prisoner among these Indians, and as they could Speak together our officers Spoke to the head chief & told him our business and that the white people would Supply them with marchandize at the head of the Missourie &C.    asked for canoes to cross the river    they Said they wished us to Stay with them to day as we lived a great way off, and they wished to See us dance this evening & begged on us to Stay this day. So our officers concluded to Stay this day.    the head chief brought up a good horse & Said he wished to give it to us but as he was poor he wished us to give him Some kind of a kittle, but as we could not Spare a kittle Capt. Clark gave his Sword a flag and half pound of powder & ball for the horse.    we took our horses across the river.    our officers made another chief gave him a meddle &C.    in the afternoon an number of Indians came to our officers who were diseased the lame and many with Sore eyes and lame legs & arms &C.    our officers dressd. their wounds, washed their eyes & gave them meddicine and told them how to apply it &C.    the chief called all his people and told them of the meddicine &C. which was a great wonder among them & they were much pleased &C.    the Indians Sent their women to gether wood or Sticks to See us dance this evening.    about 300 of the natives assembled to our Camp    we played the fiddle and danced a while    the head chief told our officers that they Should be lonesome when we left them and they wished to hear once of our meddicine Songs and try to learn it and wished us to learn one of theirs and it would make them glad. So our men Sang 2 Songs which appeared to take great affect on them.    they tryed to learn Singing with us with a low voice.    the head chief then made a Speech & it was repeated by a warrier that all might hear.    then all the Savages men women and children of any Size danced forming a circle round a fire & jumping up nearly as other Indians, & keep time verry well    they wished our men to dance with them So we danced among them and they were much pleased, and Said that they would dance day and night untill we return.    everry fiew minutes one of their warries made a Speech pointing towards the enimy and towards the moon &C. &C    which was all repeated by another meddison man with a louder voice as all might hear.    the dance continued untill about midnight then the most of them went away peaceable & have behaved verry clever and honest with us as yet, and appear to have a Sincere wish to be at peace and to git acquaintance with us &C &C—


GassMonday 28th.    The morning was pleasant, and we spent it with the Indians, and got dogs, fish, shap-a-leel and roots from them. At 10 o'clock we began to take our horses over the river at this place, as we can lessen our journey considerably by crossing: We borrowed canoes from the natives, and swam the horses alongside, and at 2 o'clock in the afternoon had them all landed safe, after a good deal of trouble. From this place we can discover a range of mountains, covered with snow, in a southeast direction and about fifty miles distant. In the evening the weather was cloudy, and it thundered and threatened rain, a few drops of which fell. We remained here all night, and about dark above a hundred of the natives came down from the forks to see us. They joined with those at this place and performed a great dance. We were a very interesting sight to the surrounding crowd, as nine-tenths of them had never before seen a white man.



Also called Chimnapams, presently known as the Yakimas. The term is Shahaptian čamnápam, "the people of the Chamná," referring to a village at the mouth of the Yakima River. See October 16, 1805.The ingredients they used in eye wash included white vitriol (zinc sulphate) and sugar of lead (lead acetate). Chuinard (OOMD), 157–58.Causes of these eye troubles probably included glaucoma, trachoma, gonorrheal infections, and nearsightedness. Ibid., 361.Probably Colles's fracture, first described by Abraham Colles of Dublin some eight year later. Ibid., 364.Where the Clearwater River empties into the Snake.The route they would follow in a few days across Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield, and
Asotin counties, Washington, to the mouth of the Clearwater River at Lewiston, Nez Perce County, Idaho.Sacagawea.Yelleppit, chief of the Walulas, is discussed at Clark's entry of October 19, 1805.The Blue Mountains of northeast Oregon and southeast Washington.Designated by the captains as Chymnapos, or Chimnapums, these people were Yakimas, 
living at the mouth of the Yakima River and the junction of the Columbia and the Snake.