December 20, 1805ClarkDecember 20th Friday 1805
Some rain and hail last night and this morning it rained hard untill 10 oClock, men all employd Carrying Punchens and Covering Cabins 4 of which we had Covered, & Set Some to Dobing—    the after part of the day Cloudy and Some Showers of rain. 3 Indians came with Lickorish Sackacomie berries & mats to Sell, for which they asked Such high prices that we did not purchase any of them,—    Those people ask double & tribble the value of everry thing they have to Sell, and never take less than the full value of any thing, they prise only Blue & white beeds, files fish hooks and Tobacco—    Tobacco and Blue beeds principally
ClarkFriday 20th of December 1805
Some rain and hail last night and the rained Continued untill 10 oClock a,m, Men all employd in Carrying punchens or boads & Covering the houses, 4 of which were Covered to day, the after part of the day Cloudy with Several Showers of rain—    3 Indians arrive in a Canoe.    they brought with them mats, roots & Sackacome [NB: Sac à Commis] berries to Sell for which they asked Such high prices that we did not purchase any of them.    Those people ask generally double and tribble the value of what they have to Sell, and never take less than the real value of the article in Such things as is calculated to do them Service. Such as Blue & white beeds, with which they trade with the naivs above; files which they make use of to Sharpen their tools, fish hooks of different Sises and tobacco—    Tobacco and blue beeds they do prefur to every thing.
Ordway
Friday 20th Decr. 1805.    cloudy and rain.    about 10 oClock cleared off, but rained again before evening.—

GassFriday 20th.    The morning was cloudy and wet.— We collected all the puncheons or slabs we had made, and some which we got from some Indian huts up the bay, but found we had not enough to cover all our huts. About 10 o'clock the weather became clear; but before night it rained as fast as before. From this day to the 25th we had occasionally rain and high winds, but the weather still continued warm. On the evening of the 24th we got all our huts covered and daubed.

Whitehouse
Friday Decemr 20th    A Cloudy wet morning, & continued so the whole of this day.    We continued on building our huts, notwithstanding the badness of the weather.—

