November 14, 1804ClarkFort Mandan14th of November Wednesday 1804
a Cloudy morning, ice runing verry thick    river rose ½ Inch last night Some Snow falling, only two Indians visit us to day Owing to a Dance at the Village last night in Concluding a Serimoney of adoption, and interchange of property, between the Ossiniboins, <Christinoes> [NB: Knistenaux] and the nations of this neighbourhood—    we Sent one man by land on hors back to know the reason of the Delay of our hunters, this evening 2 french men who were traping below Came up—with 20 beaver we are compelled to use our Pork which we doe Spearingly for fear of Some falur in precureing a Sufficiency from the Woods.
our Interpeter informs that 70 Lodges one of 3 bands of Assinniboins & Some Crestinoes, are at the Mandan Village. The Crrirstinoes are abt. 300 [NB: 240] men    Speak the Chipaway—Language, the live near Fort De peare [NB: on Assiniboin & Apaskashawan] [NB: they are bands of the Chippaways] 
OrdwayWednesday 14th Nov.    a Snowey morning.    one man Sent down the River in order to meet the pearogue & h. See what was the cause of their delaying So long.    abto. 3 o.C. P. M. we Saw a cannoe comming up the River with 2 men on board which we Supposed to be the frenchmen who went down the River Some days ago traping.    at dark the 2 frenchman ari.    had caught 22 beaver.    they did not See our hunting party.

The name Cree was an abbreviated form of Kristinaux, the French version of a Cree name for themselves, Kenistenoag. They were of the Algonquian language family. The Plains Crees were buffalo-hunting nomads whose range was almost entirely in Canada, north of the Assinniboines and the Sioux. Clark's statement that they "Speak the Chipaway" refers to the Chippewas, or Ojibways, who also spoke an Algonquian tongue. The adoption Clark refers to was apparently to insure good treatment of the visitors during trading. Hodge, 1:359–62; Denig, 99–136; Coues (NLEH), 2:510–16. It was apparently Biddle who crossed out Clark's spelling in red and substituted his own.There were several North West Company posts called Fort des Prairies; this one was probably on the South Saskatchewan River. Wood & Thiessen, 82 n. 13, 84 n. 16.The Saskatchewan River, one of the major streams of the Canadian Great Plains.