June 28, 1805LewisFriday June 28th 1805.
Set Drewyer to shaving the Elk skins, Fields to make the cross stays for the boat, Frazier and Whitehouse continue their operation with the skins, Shields and Gass finish the horizontal bars of the sections; after which I sent them in surch of willow bark, a sufficient supply of which they now obtained to bind the boat.    expecting the party this evening I prepared a supper for them but they did not arrive.    not having quite Elk skins enough I employed three buffaloe hides to cover one section.    not being able to shave these skins I had them singed pretty closely with a blazeing torch; I think they will answer tolerable well. The White bear have become so troublesome to us that I do not think it prudent to send one man alone on an errand of any kind, particularly where he has to pass through the brush.    we have seen two of them on the large Island opposite to us today but are so much engaged that we could not spare the time to hunt them but will make a frolick of it when the party return and drive them from these islands.    they come close arround our camp every night but have never yet ventured to attack us and our dog gives us timely notice of their visits, he keeps constantly padroling all night. I have made the men sleep with their arms by them as usual for fear of accedents.    the river is now about nine inches higher than it was on my arrival.    lower Camp.    early this morning Capt. C. dispatched the remaining canoe with some baggage to the top of the plain above Portage creek three miles in advance; some others he employed in carrying the articles to the cash and depositing them and others to mend the carriages which wer somewhat out of repair.    this being accomplished he loaded the two carriages with the remaining baggage and set out with all the party and proceeded on with much difficulty to the canoe in the plain.    portage creek had arisen considerably and the water was of crimson colour and illy tasted.    on his arrival at the canoe he found there was more baggage than he could possibly take at one load on the two sets of trucks and therefore left some barrels of pork & flour and a few heavy boxes of amunition which could not well be injured, and proceeded with the canoe & one set of trucks loaded with baggage to willow run where he encamped for the night, and killed two buffaloe to subsist the party.    soon after his arrival at willow run he experienced a hard shower of rain which was succeeded by a violent wind from the S. W. off the snowy mountains, accompanyed with rain; the party being cold and wet, he administered the consolation of a dram to each. ClarkJune 28th Friday 1805
a fair morning    wind from the South    I dispatch the remaining Canoe with baggage in her to the top of the Hill three miles, imploy Some hands in Carrying those things we intend to deposit to the Carsh or hole, Some to repareing one of the trucks &c. &c.    the water is riseing and of a redish brown Cholour     after Covering the Carshe & loading the two Carrges with the remaining part of our Baggage we all Set out passed the Creek which had rose a little and the water nearly red, and bad tasted, we assended the hill to the place the Canoe lay with great labour, at the Canoe at which place we left Some boxes & Kegs of Pork & flour for another Load, and proceeded on with the Canoe & what baggage we could draw on the wheels to willow run 6 miles where we Camped, this run mearly Some water remaining in holes &c. Soon after we halted we had a Shower, and at dark we expereinced a most dredfull wind from off the Snow Mountains to the S. W. accompd. with rain which continued at intervales all night men wet. I refreshed them with a dram. Killed 2 Buffalow. Great nos. aboutOrdwayJune 28th Friday 1805.    a fair morning.    wind from the South    we Set out with the remaining canoe and baggage took it to the top of the hill three miles.    the men who remained at the camp was employed carrying those things we intend to deposite to the whole or carsh. Some repairing one of the trucks &C.    the water is riseing and of a redish brown cholour. after covering the carshe or whole, and loading the 2 carriages with the remaining part of the Baggage, we all Set out passing red creek which had rose a little and the water nearly red and bad tasteed.    we ascended the hill to the place the canoe lay with great labour, at the canoe at which place we left some boxes & kegs of pork & flower for another load, and proceeded on with the
canoe and what baggage we could draw on the wheels to willow run 6 miles where we camped.    this run nearly dry    some water remaining in wholes. Soon after we halted, we had a Shower and at dark we experienced a most dreedful wind from off the Snow Mountains to the S. W. accompanied with rain which lasted nearly all night. Capt. Clark refreshed the men with a dram.    killed 2 buffalow    great numbrs. about this run



GassFriday 28th.    A fine morning. There are but 6 persons now at this camp, but all busy about the boat; some shaving skins, some sewing them together; and some preparing the wood part.



WhitehouseJune 28th Friday 1805.    a fair morning the wind from the South.    I remained with Capt. Lewis assisting with the Iron boat &c.—
Friday June 28th    We had a Clear morning, which continued the whole of this day, the party that was at the upper Camp, were all employed in fitting out the Iron boat &ca.


Perhaps the Lewis range of the Rockies, along the Continental Divide.An alternate name for the party's Portage Creek, modern Belt Creek, Chouteau and
Cascade counties, Montana.Lewis, Gass, Drouillard, Joseph Field, Frazer, Whitehouse, and Shields were all there; perhaps Gass did not count himself. For their duties, see Lewis's entry.