Weather, February 1806Lewis and Clark[Weather, February 1806]Day ofye Monthaspect ofthe weatherat ☉ riseWind at☉ riseaspect of theweather at4 OC1 P. M.Wind at4 O'ClockP. M.1stfN. E.fN. E.2cdfN. E.c a sS W3rdc a s & rN Wc a fN. E.4thfN Ef.N. E.5thfN. E.f.N E6thfN. EcS. W.7thcS. W.cS. W.8thc a s r & HS W	c a f r h & sS W9thc a r & hS Wc a r & hS. W.10thc a r h & sN.c a f & c.S. W11thc a f & cS Wr a f & rS W.12thr a r & cS Wr a c & rS. W13thc. a. rS. W.c a rS. W.14thc. a f & sS. W.r. a. r. f. & r.S. W.15thc. a r & f	Sc a r & fS. W16thr a s & rS Wr. a. f. & r.S W17thc a r h & sS Wr a f h s & rS W18thc a r & hS Wr a r & hS. W19thr a rS W.r a rS. W20thc a rS Wc a rS. W.21str a c & rS Wr a c & rS. W22cdf. a. r.N Ec a fN E23rdfS. W.c a fS W24thc a f & cS. W.r a c & rS25thr a rSr a rS26thf a rN Ec a f & rS27thc a rS Wr a rS. W.28thr a rS. Wc a c & fS. W[Remarks]1stthe weather by no means as could as it was tho' it freized last
night2cdthe bald Eagle still remains.3rdthe snow fell about half an inch, but the rain which succeded
soon melted it    at 9 A. M. the sun shone.    the rain which feel
in the latter part of the night freized and formed a slight in-
crustation on the snow which fell some days past, and also on
the boughs of the trees &c. yesterday it continued fair until 11
A. M. when the wind vered about to S. W. and the horizon was
immediately overcast with clouds, which uniformly takes place
when the wind is from that point.4ththe last night clear and could    the Netul frozen over in several
places.    all the waterfowls before innumerated still continue
with us.    the bird which resembles the robbin have now vis-ited us in small numbers    saw two of them yesterday about the
fort; they are gentle.6thvery cold last night    think it reather the coldest night that we
have had.    cloudy at 9 A M7thcontinued cloudy all night    a little snow at 10 A. M.8thit was principally rain which fell since 4 P. M. yesterday, it
has caused the snow to disappear    the rain of the last night
has melted down the snow wich has continued to cover the
ground since the 24th of January; the feeling of the air and
other appearances seem to indicate, that the rigor of the
winter have passed; it is so warm that we are apprehensive
that our meat will spoil, we therefore cut it in small peices
and hang it seperately on sticks. Saw a number of insects
flying about.    the small brown flycatch continues with us.
this is the smallest of all the American birds except the hum-
ming bird.9thprincipally rain which has fallen.10thSnow covered the ground this morning disappeared before
evening.    sun shown 2 hours12thit rained the greater part of last night.13thWind very hard last evening and all night14thvery small quantity of snow fell last night    not enough to cover
the ground    somewhat colder this morning.    the sun shown
only a few moments.15thfair most of last night    hard frost this morning.    the ground
white with it. The robbin returned and were singing which re-
minded me of spring.    some other small birds passed on their
flight from the South, but were so high that we would not dis-
tinguish of what kind they were.    the robbin had left this place
before our arrival in November.16thbut a small quantity of snow    nearly all disolved by morn-
ing with the succeeding rain.    at 11 A. M. it became fair and
the insects were flying about.    at ½ after 12 O'Ck it again
clouded up and began to rain.17ththe hail and snow covered the ground this morning18thwind violent greater part of the day and all night19thwind violent all day.20thwind violent all night and the greater part of the day.21stthe wind continues high this morning & untill evening.22cdthe wind scarcely perceptable23rdheavy white frost this morning.    at eleven A M it couded up
and continued so all day24ththe wind became hard this evening.    much warmer this morn-
ing than usual.    the aquatic and other birds heretofore enu-
merated continue with us still.    the Sturgeon and a small fish
like the Anchovey begin to run.    they are taken in the Co-
lumbia about 40 mils. above us.    the anchovey is exquisitely fine.—25ththe wind violent all night and this morning    continued untill
late in the evening when it ceased.26that 9 A. M. it clouded up again.28thit rained constantly during the last night.    the sun shown about
9 A. M. partially a few minutes    saw a variety of insects in mo-
tion this morning some small bugs as well as flies.    a brown fly
with long legs about half the size of the common house fly
was the most common.    this has been the first insect that ap-
peared    it is generally about the sinks or filth of any kind.    the
yellow and brown flycatch has returned.    it is a very small bird
with a tail as long proportiably as a Sparrow.Lewis's weather table and remarks are in Codex J; Clark's are in Voorhis No. 2. This table follows Lewis, with substantial differences noted.Clark has "N. W."Lewis's remarks in Codex J are in the margin of his weather table and separate; Clark's in Voorhis No. 2 are also in the margin of this table and separate. Lewis's remarks are followed here.The varied thrush.Again perhaps the winter wren, but see weather remarks for January 31, 1806.Clark has "about 30 miles."