September 7, 1806ClarkSunday 7th September 1806
as we were doubtfull that the two fieldses were behind I derected Sergt. Ordway with 4 men to Continue untill Meridian and if those men did not arive by that hour to proceed on.    if we met with them at any Short distance a gun Should be fired which would be a Signal for him to proceed on.    we had proceeded on about 8 miles by water and the distance through not more than 1 mile when we Saw the fire of those 2 men, I derected a gun fired as a Signal for Sergt. ordway to proceed on, and took the boys on board.    they had killed nothing & informed me they had been Somewhat almd. at our delay, that the distance across from the little Sieoux river was about 1½ miles only, the bottoms thick and Grass very high.    we proceded on with a Stiff Breeze ahead    (note the evaperation on this portion of the Missouri has been noticed as we assended this river, and it now appears to be greater than it was at that time. I am obliged to replenish my ink Stand every day with fresh ink at least 9/10 of which must evaperate.[)]    we proceded on to a bottom on the S W Side a little above the Soldiers river and Came too and Sent out all the hunters.    they killed 3 Elk which was at no great distance    we Sent out the men and had the flesh brought in Cooked and Dined. Sergt. Ordway Came up & after takeing a Sumptious Dinner    we all Set out at 4 P M wind ahead as usial.    at Dusk we came too on the lower part of a Sand bar on the S W side found the Musquetors excessively tormenting not withstanding a Stiff breeze from the S. E.    a little after dark the wind increased the Musquetors dispersed    our Camp of this night is about 2 miles below our Encampment of the 4th of august 1804 assending    we came 44 miles to day only—
Ordway
Sunday 7th Sept. 1806.    a pleasant morning.    the party Set out eairly leaving me with my canoe to wait for the [hunters]    we waited untill abt. 10 A. M. then hearing a blunderbuss fired a head as a Signal that the hunters were a head. So we Set out and followed on    the wind So high that we could
Scarsely proced.    about 2 oClock P. M. we overtook the party who had halted to hunt as the wind was So high.    the Hunters killed 4 Elk and caught three large catfish which was fat.    towards evening the wind abated So that we procd. on untill after Sunset and Camped on a sand beach.    the Musquetoes not So troublesome as they have been for a long time past.


GassSunday 7th.    We had a pleasant morning. The hunters not having come in we left a canoe, with directions to wait till 12 o'clock for them; and proceeded on. About 9 o'clock we met with our hunters, but they had not killed any thing; and at 11 halted to hunt and wait for the canoe. In a short time we killed three elk and brought in the meat; and the canoe having come up we proceeded on, and at sunset encamped. The musketoes are not so troublesome as they were some time ago.


Lewis called attention to evaporation on the upriver trip in his Weather Diary entry for September 23, 1804.Soldier River, first passed on August 6, 1804, meets the Missouri in Harrison County, Iowa. Atlas map 14; MRC map 24.They camped in either Harrison County, or in Washington County, Nebraska, near present Blair, Nebraska. Atlas map 14; MRC map 24.The Field brothers, Clark notes.Containing Ordway and four men.