June 7, 1806LewisSaturday June 7th 1806.
The two young Cheifs who visited last evening returned to their village on Commeâp C. with some others of the natives. Sergt. Gass, McNeal, Whitehouse and Goodrich accompanyed them with a view to procure some pack or lash ropes in exchange for parts of an old sain, fish giggs, peices of old iron, old files and some bullets.    they were also directed to procure some bags for the purpose of containing our roots & bread.    in the evening they all returned except Whitehouse and Goodrich who remained all night.    they procured a few strings but no bags. Hohâstillpilp passed the river today and brought over a horse which he gave Frazier one of our party who had previously made him a present of a pair of Cannadian shoes or shoe-packs.Drewyer set out on a hunting excurtion up Collins's Creek this evening.    we wish to leave the deer in the neighbourhood of the quawmash plains undisturbed untill the 10th when we intend removing thither to lay in some meat for our voyage over the Mountains.    our party are much engaged in preparing their saddles arranging their loads provisions &c for our departure. There is a speceis of cherry which grows in this neighbourhood in sitations like the Choke cherry or near the little rivulets and wartercouses.    it seldom grows in clumps or from the same cluster of roots as the choke cherry dose.    the stem is simple branching reather diffuse stem the cortex is of a redish dark brown and reather smooth.    the leaf is of the ordinary dexture and colour of those of most cherries, it is petiolate; a long oval 1¼ inhes in length and ½ an inch in width, obtuse, margin so finely serrate that it is scarcely perseptable & smooth.    the peduncle is common 1 inch in length, branch proceeding from the extremities as well as the sides of the branches, celindric gradually tapering; the secondary peduncles are about ½ an inch in length scattered tho' proceeding more from the extremity of the common peduncle and are each furnished with a small bracted.    the parts of fructification are much like those discribed of the choke cherry except that the petals are reather longer as is the calix reather deeper.    the cherry appears to be half grown, the stone is begining to be hard and is in shape somewhat like that of the plumb; it appears that when ripe it would be as large as the Kentish cherry, which indeed the growth of the bush somewhat resembles; it rises about 6 or 8 feet high
ClarkSaurday June 7th 1806.
The two young cheafs and other Indians who accompanied them Crossed the river and returned to their Village this morning after brackfast; ShabonoSergt GassMcNeal, Whitehouse & Goodrich accompanied them for the purpose of purchaseing or exchangeing old peces of Sane, fish gig, peces of iron, bullets, and old files and Such articles as they Could raise for ropes and Strings for to lash their loads, and bags to Cary their roots in Sergt. Gass, Shabono & McNeal returned at 2 P M haveing precured a String each only. Whitehouse and Goodrich continued at the Village all night. Hohastillpilp crossed the river to day and brought over a horse and gave it to Frazier one of our party who had made him a present previously of a Par of Canidian Shoes.    one of our men informed me one of the young Chiefs who had given us two horses already was in Serch of one which he intended to give to me. Geroge Drewyer Set out on a hunting excurtion up Collins's Creek alone.    our party are all much engaged in prepareing Sadles and packing up their Stores of Provisions &c—    The Flat Head river is about 150 yards wide at this place and discharges a vast body of water; notwithstanding it's high State the water remains nearly transparent, and it's temperature appears to be quit as cold as that of our best Springs.    we met with a butifull little bird in this neighbourhood about the Size and Somewhat the Shape of the large Sparrow.    it measures 7 inches from the extremity of the beak to that of the tail, the latter Occupying 2½ inches.    the beak is reather more than half an inch in length, and is formed much like the Virginia Nightingal; red bd. it is thick and large for a bird of it's size, wide at the base, both Chaps convex, and pointed, the upper exceeds the under chap a little is Somewhat cirved and of a brown Colour; the lower chap of a Greenish yellow.    the eye full reather large and of a black colour both puple and iris.    the plumage is remarkably delicate; that of the neck and head is of a fine orrange yellow and red.    the latter predomonates on the top of the head and around the base of the beak from whence it gradually diminishes towards the lower part of the Neck, the orring yellow prevails most, the red has the Appearance of haveing been laid over a Ground of yellow.    the breast, the Sides, rump and some long feathers which lie between the legs extend underneath the tail is of a fine orrange yellow.    the tail, back and wings are black, except a Small Strip of yellow on the outer part of the Middle joint of the wing, ¼ of an inch wide and an inch in length.    the tail is composed of 12 feathers of which those in the Center are reather Shortest, and the plumage of all the feathers of the tail is longest on that Side of the quill next to the Center of the tail.    the legs and feet are black, nails long and Sharp; it has four toes on each foot, of which three are forward and one behind; that behind is as long as the two outer of the three toes in front—.
Observed equal altitudes of the Sun with Sextent, June the 6th 1806.—.—. hm  hms  A M.155  4.5 P.M.101748}Altitude 64° 42' 30" "5630  "1912 "5757  "2040h    m    sChronometer too slow on M. T.   [blank]Ordway
Saturday 7th June 1806.    cloudy & light Showers of rain intermixed with hail & Snow.    the air cold. Several of the party went over the river to Some villages    all except 2 returnd with Some uppah and couse &C.


GassSaturday 7th.    We had a cloudy morning with a few drops of rain. I went over with five of our party to the village, on the other side of the river; and while we were going some snow fell. The greater part of the natives were out hunting. In the evening we all returned to camp, except two, who remained at the village. Some of the natives again came to visit us, one of whom gave a horse to one of our men, who is very fond of conversing with them and of learning their language.



					
Probably a seine.Shoes of tanned leather made without separate soles, rather like moccasins. Criswell, 77.This is an excellent and accurate description of bitter cherry, Prunus emarginata (Dougl.) Walpers var. emarginata. The "kentish cherry" may refer to a European species, such as sloe, blackthorn, P. spinosa L. Hitchcock et al., 3:158–59; Little (MWH), 122-W; Bailey, 539. Again, perhaps Biddle drew this red vertical line through descriptive material about a species, beginning about here and going to "perseptable & smooth."Someone, probably Biddle, drew a vertical line through this passage, beginning about here and going into several lines of the description of the western tanager. The first part of the mark is in dark ink, the remainder is in Biddle's usual red ink.Charbonneau, Gass, McNeal, Whitehouse, and Goodrich, write the captains.Whitehouse and Goodrich stayed, according to Lewis and Clark.The captains give only four names: Charbonneau, McNeal, Whitehouse, and Goodrich.Hohots Ilppilp.Frazer. The captains note that Frazer had given the chief a pair of "Canadian shoes," 
but say nothing of his camaraderie with the Nez Perces.