September 18, 1804ClarkSeptr. 18
I Killed a prarie wolf to day about the Sise of a Gray fox with a bushey tail    the head and ears like a Fox wolf, and barks like a Small Dog—    The annimale which we have taken for the Fox is this wolf, we have seen no Foxes.18 Septr. Tuesday    Set out early    wind from the N W. Modrt.    our boat being much litened goes much better than usialCourse N. 45° E1me. to the lower point of a Island (1)N. 25° E.3me. to a pt. on the L. S.    passed the Isd. at 1 me. &
Some Sand bars makeing from it    a Creek opsd. on
S. S.N. 14° E1 ½mes. to a point of willows on the L. S.N. 10 W.1 ½mes. to a point of wood on the L. S.    hard windN. 22 W1me. to a pt. of wood on the L. S. and Came to at 5
oClock to jurke the meat killed to day and what
was collected from what was Killed yesterday, i e 10
Deer to Day 4 & a Elk yesterday    a Cole night for
the Season 8 Clark18th Septr.Course Distance & reffurencsN. 45 E1me. to the lower pt. of an Island (1)N. 25° E2miles to a pt. on the L. S.    passed the Isld. at one mile and
Some Sand bars making from it, a Creek on the L. S. opsd.
the upper pointN. 14° E1 ½mes. to a pt. of willows on the L. SideN 10 W.1 ½mes. to a point of wood on the L S.N. 22 W.1mile to a pt. on the L. S. and the upper part of the timber 7 September 18th Tuesday 1804
Wind from the N W.    we Set out early the boat much lightened, the wind a head proceed on verry Slowly    (1) Passed an I a Island about the middle of the river at 1 Mile    this Island is about a mile long, and has a great perpotion of red Cedir on it, a Small Creek comes in on the S. S. opposit the head of the Island, proceeded on    passed many Sand bars and Camped on the L. S.    before night the wind being verry hard & a head all Day.    the hunters Killed 10 Deer to day and a Prarie wolf, had it all jurked & Skins Stretchd after Camping
I walked on Shore Saw Goats, Elk, Buffalow, Black tail Deer, & the Common Deer, I Killed a Prarie Wollf, about the Size of a gray fox bushey tail head & ear like a wolf, Some fur    Burrows in the ground and barks like a Small Dog.
what has been taken heretofore for the Fox was those wolves, and no Foxes has been Seen; The large wolves are verry numourous, they are of a light Colr. large & has long hair with Corrs [X: Coarse] fur.
Some Goats of a Different Kind Wer Seen yesterday    Great many Porcupin rabits & Barking Squirils in this quarter.    Plumbs & grapes.
LewisSept. 18th
this day saw the first brant on their return from the north—

OrdwayTuesday 18th Sept.    a fair morning.    we Set off at ½ past 5 o.C.    proceeded on, passed an Island at our wright    Some Timber along the S. S. Elm, ash, Scrubby oak &.C—    George Drewyer killed a prarie woolf Some larger than a fox.    long teeth & of a different discription from any in the States &.C.    we proceeded on to a Bottom prarie covered with thin cottonwood Timber where Jo Fields with the horse had killed a Buck Deer—    took on board the meat killed yesterday—    Capt. Clark & G. Drewyer walked on Short on S. S.    no Timber seen by the hunters back from the river—    Capt. Clark & G. Drewyer returned towards evening.    had killed 10 Deer & one prarie woolf    We Camped on the South Side in a Small Grove of Timbers, 2 hours eairlier than usal the wind being a head, in order to jurk our meat &.C    the Bones of the woolf was taken apart and Saved as well as the Skins of them boath in order to Send back to the States next Spring, with the other curiousities we have or may have &.C.—

GassTuesday 18th.    We continued our voyage; the day was clear and pleasant: passed some timber land on the south side, and hills and prairies on the north; also an island and a great number of sand bars. Yesterday captain Lewis while hunting killed a bird not common in the states: it is like a magpie and is a bird of prey. This day we killed eleven deer and a wolf, and halted and encamped on the south side of the river in order to jirk our meat.

WhitehouseTuesday 18th Sept.    we Set off from camp pleasant    a clear day.    passed timbered land on the S. S.    hills and prarie on the N. S.    passd. an Isd. and a Great nomber of Sand bars.    Capt. Lewis in his yesterdays hunt killed a bird not common in the States a bird of pray resembling the Europian magpy.    <as> Capt. ClarkDrewyer & jo Fields killed 11 deer and one wolf    we Camped before night in order to jerk our meat on the S. Side    Fields did not join us this night.—
September 18th Tuesday    We set off from Pleasant Camp early this morning, having Clear & pleasant weather; we proceeded on, and passed by fine timber'd land, lying on the South side of the River, the land on the North side being hilly Priaries.    we met with a great number of Sand Barrs, and an Island lying on the North side of the River, Captain Lewis kill'd in his hunt Yesterday, a bird, which is uncommon in the United States    It was a Bird of Prey, and had some resemblance of the Magpie.—    The hunters who had went out early this Morning return'd to us; having killed 11 deer, and one Wolf, which was brought to us.    We encamped in the afternoon on the South side of the River, in order to Jerk the meat which had been kill'd these two days,


Here and in his Codex B entry Clark gives a brief scientific description of the coyote, one of the most widespread and characteristic mammals of the Great Plains. Lewis gives a more detailed description on May 5, 1805. Cutright (LCPN), 85.The island was the later American, or Cedar, Island, and the creek is American Creek, at the site of present Chamberlain, Brule County, South Dakota. Atlas maps 20, 21, 22; MRC map 37. The fort shown on these maps as "Mr. Manuel's Fort" and "Cedar Fort," the site of which they passed a little below Cedar Island, was not there in 1804. It was one of the posts built by Manuel Lisa, probably the "Cedar Fort" his Missouri Fur Company established in 1809 to trade with the Sioux, which burned in 1810. The Lisa post has been thought to be either here or at the same site as Régis Loisel'sCedar Fort, or Fort aux Cedres (see below, September 22, 1804); the Maximilian maps suggest that the site here, in Lyman County, South Dakota, just below present Chamberlain, is correct. The notations on Maximilian's map were probably on the basis of later information inserted on Clark's originals. Mattes, 522–28; Oglesby, 83, 97; Chittenden, 1:145, 2:952–53; MRC map 37.In Lyman County, a few miles northeast of present Oacoma. Atlas maps 20, 21; MRC map 37.The "large wolves" are gray wolves. References to "prairie wolves" in the journals are probably to coyotes. Cutright (LCPN), 85; Burroughs, 88.Lewis's natural history notes from Codex Q. The brant is probably the Canada goose, Branta canadensis [AOU, 172]. See the Weather Diary, March 1804.Black-billed magpie, Pica pica."Pleasant Camp" appears to be written over an erasure.