July 28, 1804Clark
July 28th Satturday    Set out this morning early, the wind blou from the N. W. by N.    a Dark Smokey Morning, Some rain    at 1 me. passed a Bluff on the S. S. it being the first high land approachig the river above the Nodaway, a Island and Creek S. S.    just abov this creek I call <Bald> Indian Knob    G. Drewyer Came with a Dee[r] & informs he heard fireing to the S. W.    I walked on Shore on the S. S.    found some good Prarie out from the S. pt. The High Lands approach the river 1st bend to left    The party on Shore brought in a Missouri Indian who resides with the Otteauz, this Indian & 2 others were Hunting in the Prarie    their Camp is about 4 miles off. This Indian informs that his nation is in the Plains hunting the Buffalow, the party with which he is encamped is about 20 familey Hunting the Elk, we landed on S. S. below an IslandCourse Distance & reffurence's the 28th of July 1804 SatturdayS 82° E  1Mile on the L. Side to pt. of a Sand bar L. SN. 10° W     ½me. on the L. S.    the high land approaches the river on
S. S.    this is the first place the high land has touched the
river above the nordaway.    nearest 3 Ms.N. 30° W.     ½m on L. S.N. 77° W  3m to a point on the L. S.    passed a Island & creek on S. S.
abov BluffsN. 60 W  3ms. to a pt. on S. S.    psd. the Isd. S. S. <&	opsd. the oldOtteaus village> L. SN.   "   "     ¾m. the same course continued—N. 63 E.  2m. to a pt. Lard. opposite to a small <willow> island from
which it is divided by a cannel of [blank] yards in width 10 ¾ ClarkJuly the 28th, Satturday 1804
Set out this morning early, the wind from the N W. by N.    a Dark Smokey morning    Some rain    passed at 1 me. a Bluff on the S. S. the first high land above the Nodaway aproaching the river on that Side    a Island and Creek 15 yds. wide on the S. S. above this Bluff, as this Creek has no name call it Indian Knob Creek    our party on Shore Came to the river and informs that they heard fireing to the S W.    below this High Land on the S. S. the Aiawuay [Iowa] Indians formerly lived, <below this old village about <7> 5 miles passed Some monds on the L S. in a bend Where the Otteauze Indians formerly lived, This Situation I examined found it well situated for Defence    about 2 or 300 acres of Land Covered with mounds>    The flank came in & informed they heard two Guns to the S. W.    the high land approaches in the 1st bend to the left, we camped on the S. S. below the point of an Island, G Drewyer brought in a Missourie Indian which he met with hunting in the Prarie    This Indian is one of the fiew remaining of that nation, & lives with the Otteauz, his Camp about 4 miles from the river, he informs that the 'great gangue' of the nation were hunting the Buffalow in the Plains.    h[i]s party was Small Consisting only of about 20 Lodges, [blank] miles furthr a nother Camp where there was a french man, who lived in the nation, This Indian appeared spritely, and appeared to make use of the Same pronouncation of the Osarge, Calling a Chief IncaCours. Distance & reffers. July 28S. 82° E.  1me. on the L. Side to pt. of a Sand bar L. SN. 10 W.     ½me. on the L. S. a High Bluff on the Stabd. S.
above the Old Village of the Aiaawaz this High
Land the 1st abov  Nordaway which approaches
the S. S.N. 30° W.     ½on the L. SideN. 77 W.  3ms. to a pt. on the L. S.    psd. an Isd. & Indian
Knob Creek S. S.N. 60 W.  3ms. to a pt. on the S. S.    passed The aforesaid
Island S. S.N. 60 W.     ¾on the S. S.N. 63 E  2ms. to a point L. S. opsd. a Island in the M. River 10 ¾ OrdwaySaturday July 28th 1804. Cloudy morning    we Set out eairly    proceeded
on past a h. bottom prarie on N. S.    back of these praries a high Ridge with Some Timbers on it & in the vallies near the prarie    above these praries the hills made in close & Steep to the River.    a nomber of high round knobs on those hills which are bare from Timber. Some Timber in the vallies    we passed the mouth of a Small Creek which comes in behind an Island from among those Ridges which is named Round Knob Creek.     the land opt. on the S. S. is low, the Timber mostly Cotton wood. G. Drewyer came to the bank with the horses, brought in a Deer which he killed    The wind hard from the N. E. Detained us Some time    we proceeded on passt a high bank on S. S.    thin Timbers on the N. S. G. Drewyer found three of the Zotaus Indians Dressing an Elk.    they were friendly and Gave him a part of it and one of them came with him in order to find the Boat. Drewyer killed one Deer & joined us    brought the Indian with him, where we was Camped on the north Side of the River in Timbered land below an Isld. & prarie.—

Floyd
Satturday July 28th    Set out verry erley this morning    prossed on    passed a Creek on the <South> North Side Called Beaver Creek    is about
20 yrds wide    the Land is Low    that on the South is Prarie Land    Rain the
fore part of the day    the Latter part Clear with wind from the North Est.    made 10 miles    Campt on the N. Side    the Land is Low    that on the South is High prarie Land    ouer flanken partey Came with one Indian thay found on the South Side


GassSaturday, 28th.    We set out early; had a cloudy morning: passed some beautiful hills and prairies, and a creek called Round-Knob creek, on the north side; and high bluffs on the south. We encamped on the north side. Here two of our hunters came to us, accompanied by one of the Oto Indians.Whitehouse
Saturday July 28th 1804.    cloudy morning.    we Set out eairly    proceded on past a high Bottom prarie on N. S.    Some Timber on the Ridge back of those praries    above the Bottom prarie the hills make in close to the River verry high & Steep.    we passd. the mouth of a Small Creek on N. S. named Round Knob Creek.    the wind Blew hard from N. E.    G. Drewyer joined us at 11 oC with one Deer.    we Came to a hi CLift or Buut one hun[dred] feet    the Barge Struck a Sand Bare on the Side of the River on the Star Bord S.    inCampe on the north Side of the [river] at the foot of a iLand CaLd the BLuf iLand    we Rowed 10 Miles that day.    the hunterers Comin and Brought one indian with [them &c?]
Saturday July 28th    The morning still continued Cloudy, we set out early, and passed a high bottom Priari on the North side; having on the back side of them high ridges with Trees growing on them.    above the bottom Priari the hills make in close to the River; and are very high and steep, we passed the Mouth of a Creek, laying on the North side of the River, which is called knob Creek, the wind blowing hard from the North East.—    One of our hunters came to us having One deer which he had killed, with him.—
This hunter came to us opposite a remarkable high hill laying on the North side of the River, we took the meat on board, and proceeded on one Mile, when the boat struck a sand barr, on her larbourd Side, and all hands were obliged to jump out in the Water to prevent her from sinking, (the place the boat Grounded on being quick sand)    with much difficulty we got her off, we then proceeded one Mile, & encamp'd at the point of an Island, laying on the South side of the River.—    One of our hunters came in and brought an Indian with him of the Zoto Nation    distance come this day 10 Miles.—



Apparently Pigeon Creek, in Pottawattamie County, Iowa, north of Council Bluffs. Atlas map 13; MRC map 23; MRR map 66.The Field Notes entry continues after a break for the course material.In Pottawattamie County, somewhat north of Council Bluffs. Atlas map 13; MRC maps 23, 24; MRR map 66.This course and the next one are in Lewis's hand.Shown on Atlas map 13, just north of present Council Bluffs. MRC map 23; MRR map 65. Archaeological evidence for this site is unknown.These are the mounds mentioned July 27.The Osage and Missouri languages are both of the Siouan language family, though of different divisions within that family, the first in the Dhegiha, the second in the Chiwere division. "Inca" has no connection with the Incas of South America. Robert L. Rankin (personal communication) identifies the word as hą́ka, the Osage word signifying "sacred being" or "chief"; La Flesche gives it as Hoń-ga. Din & Nasatir, 4; La Flesche, 65.Or Indian Knob Creek, apparently Pigeon Creek, Pottawattamie County, Iowa.Probably the creek that Clark and others called Indian Knob Creek, apparently Pigeon Creek, Pottawattamie County, Iowa.Ordway and Whitehouse use this name, Clark has it as Indian Knob Creek, and Floyd calls it Beaver Creek; now probably Pigeon Creek, Pottawattamie County, Iowa.A Missouri Indian, according to Clark. Drouillard was one of the hunters.Ordway also uses this name, Clark calls it Indian Knob Creek, and Floyd has it as Beaver
Creek; it is probably Pigeon Creek, Pottawattamie County, Iowa.After this begins the writing of No. 3.The bluff at Council Bluffs, Pottawattamie County, Iowa, which Clark noted as the first high ground on that side of the river above Nodaway River.This name is not given by any other party member, but obviously derives from the bluffs 
on the Douglas County, Nebraska, side of the river, near the campsite, if not that in Pottawattamie County, Iowa.In the fair copy Whitehouse says he was a "Zoto" (Oto), but Clark calls him a Missouri Indian.