June 24, 1806LewisTuesday June 24th 1806.
We collected our horses early this morning and set out accompanyed by our three guides. Colter joined us this morning having killed a bear, which from his discription of it's poverty and distance we did not think proper to send after.    we nooned it as usual at Collins's Creek where we found Frazier, solus; the other four men having gone in pursuit of the two indian men who had set out from Collins's Creek two hours before Frazier and Wizer arrived.    after dinner we continued our rout to Fish Creek a branch of Collins's Creek where we had lain on the 19th and 20th inst.    here we found Sergt. GassWiser and the two indians whom they had prevailed on to remain at that place untill our arrival; R. & J. Feilds had only killed one small deer only while they lay at Collins's Creek and of this they had been liberal to the indians insomuch that they had no provision; they had gone on to the branch of hungary Creek at which we shall noon it tomorrow in order to hunt.    we had fine grass for our horses this evening.
ClarkTuesday June 24th 1806
We collected our horses early this morning and Set out accompanied by our 3 guides. Colter joined us this morning haveing killed a Bear, which from his discription of it's poverty and distance we did not think proper to send after. We nooned it as usial at Collins's Creek where we found Frazier, solus; the other four men haveing gorn in pursute of the two indians who had Set out from Collin's Creek two hours before Fraziers arrival Wiser arrived there.    after dinner we Continued our rout to fish Creek a branch of Collin's Creek where we had lain the 15th 18th 19th & 20th inst.    here we found Sargt. Gass, Wiser and the two indian men whome they had prevaild on to remain at that place untill our arival; Jos. & R. Field had killed one Small deer only while they lay at Collins Creek, and of this they had been liberal to the indians insomuch that they had no provisions; they had gone on to the branch of hungary Creek at which we shall noon it tomorrow in order to hunt.    we had fine grass for our horses this evening.—Ordway
Tuesday 24th June 1806.    we got up all our horses and Set out on our homeward bound journey again    proceed. on to Collinses Creek the three guides with us.    the other 2 Indians who we lift here is gone on and 4 of our men went on after them.    we dined and proceeded    towards evening we arived at a Small prarie on a branch of Collinses Creek where the 2 Indn. and our men except 2 were waiting for us.    the other 2 had gone on to hunt.    the men who Stayed with the Indians had killed one deer.—


GassTuesday 24th.    There was a cloudy morning. We gave each of the Indians a pair of mockasons, and they agreed to stay to day and wait for the party.— One of our hunters went out, but had no success. The day keeps cloudy, and the musquitoes are very troublesome. There is also a small black fly in this country, that so torments our horses, that they can get no rest, but when we 
make small fires to keep them off. At noon two hunters went on ahead to a small creek, to endeavour to kill some provision, as we cannot kill any here; and unless the party come up to night, I intend to go on with the Indians tomorrow morning. In the evening the party arrived with three more Indians, 
and we all encamped together for the night.


Alone.The camp of June 18–21, 1806, on Eldorado Creek in Idaho County, Idaho.They did not camp there on June 15, 1806; see that date and June 18.Probably the black fly, Simulium vittatum.The Field brothers; see the captains' entries for June 25.