August 31, 1805ClarkAugust 31st 1805 Satturday
A fine morning    Set out before Sun rise, as we passed the lodges at which place I had encamped for thre nights and left 2 men, Those 2 men joined us and we proceeded on in the Same rout I decended the 21st Instant, halted 3 hours on Sammon Creek to Let our horses graze    the wind hard from the S. W. I met an Indian on horse back who fled with great Speed to Some lodges below & informed them that the Enemis were Coming down, armd with guns &c.    the inhabitents of the Lodges indisceved him, we proceeded on the road on which I had decended as far as the 1st run [EC: Tower Cr] below & left the road & Proceeded up the Run [NB: run] in a tolerable road 4 miles & Encamped in Some old lodjes at the place the road leaves the Creek and assends the high Countrey    Six Indians followed us four of them the Sons of our guide; our hunters killed one Deer a goose & Prarie fowl. This day warm and Sultrey, Praries or open Valies on fire in Several places—    The Countrey is Set on fire for the purpose of Collecting the different bands, and a Band of the Flatheads to go to the Missouri where They intend passing the winter near the Buffalow    Proceeded on 22 miles to Day, 4 miles of which up a run
OrdwaySaturday 31st August 1805.    a fare morning.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on 2 miles and passd. Several lodges of the Snake nation of Indians who Stay here to fish.    they catch Sammon in their pots and wires [weirs] which they have made of willows across the River and have more or less in them everry morng.    we bough a nomber of fine large Sammon of them and proceeded on.    one hunter on a head.    one strange Indian seen which is Supposed to be one of the flat head nation.    he ran off, and the Indians could not find him.    we then proceeded on over rough high hills. Some deep Gullies of white earth. Several of the natives followed us.    went about eight miles without water and halted at a large Spring branch to let our horses feed and dine ourselves. Some pitch pine on the mountains which make near the River on each Side.    the River bottoms narrow and verry much dryed up.    the Soil verry indifferent.    we proceeded on over a level Smooth plain abt. 7 miles    then passed the end of a mountain near the
River where the Stone lay one on an other & holes So that the horses could Scarsely git along without breaking their legs.    we then proceeded on to a large Creek which falls in on the East Side of the River.    we took a path up Sd. Creek and proceeded on    found wild or choke cherrys along the
branch.    also Servis berrys which were ripe.    we Came [blank] miles this day and Camped at Some Indian lodges near the Creek.    one of the hunters killed a deer at dusk and brought it to Camp after dark.—


GassSaturday 31st.    They all came down to our camp, and we proceeded on with 27 horses and one mule. Our old guide after consulting with the rest of the Indians, thought it was better to go along the north side of the Columbia, than on the south side. We therefore proceeded down, the same way Captain Clarke had been before, 30 miles, and then turned up a creek that comes in from the north, and encamped on it about 3 miles and an half from the mouth. Two hunters had gone on ahead this morning, and at night joined us, having killed one deer. The first cost of the articles, which had been given for each horse, did not amount to more than from three to five dollars; so that the whole of them only cost about one hundred dollars.


WhitehouseSaturday 31st August 1805.    a fine morning.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on 2 miles    passed Several Indian lodges where we bought a nomber of fine Salmon.    the natives have wires [weirs] fixed across the River in which they catch more or less every night.    a Strange Indian came in Site of these lodges who they expected to be one of the nation called the flat heads.    he ran as Soon as he Saw us    Several of these natives followed after him.    we went on a Short distance further crossed the River and halted for breakfast.    one man out a hunting.    2 men Sent to Some other Indian Camps, with Some articles to buy Some more Sammon, but they had moved their Camps and we got none.    we then proceeded on over rough hills Some of them high & Steep, deep Gullies and white earth which had been washed down by rains &c.    went about eight miles and halted to bate our horses and dine.    4 or five of the natives follow us.    Some pitch pine on the Mountains which make near the River on each Side.    we proceeded on over a Smooth plain about 7 miles and passed along [th]e Side of a mountain near the River, where the Stone lay one [up]on an other and full of holes, So that it is allmost impossable for horses to pass without breaking their leggs.    we then passed along the end of this mountain.    Come to a large creek which falls in on the East Side.    we followed up this creek or Spring branch.    found pleanty of wild or choke cherries and Servis berrys.    one of the hunters killed a Deer at the edge of the evening.    we Came [blank] Miles this day and Camped at the Creek where we had Several good Indian lodges to Sleep in this night.
Saturday August 31st    We had a fine morning, & set out early, and proceeded on about 2 miles, and passed several Indian lodges, and met with some Snake Indians, from whom we purchased for trifles a number of fine Salmon, the Natives have Wares fixed across the Columbia River, in which they catch more or less of them every night—.    A strange Indian came in sight of the lodges, which we past; which the Snake Indians thought was one of the Nation of Indians, which they called the flatt head nation:—    he ran 
as soon as he saw us; and several of the Snake Indians followed him, We proceeded on a short distance, and crossed the Columbia River, where we halted to break fast.    One of our party was sent out this morning a hunting, and two others of our party was sent to the Indian Camp with some articles to purchase some Salmon,—    but the Indians had removed their Camps, & they got none.    We proceeded on our way, and crossed over some rough hills, some of them very steep, & passed through some deep Vallies, which had white earth in them, which was occasioned by the Earth being washed down from the Hills of that Collour.—
We went about eight miles & halted to rest our horses & to dine, where some of the Natives followed us.    We saw some Pitch pine trees which grew on the Mountains which make near to the River on each side of it.    We proceeded on & passed through a smooth plain about 7 Miles & along the side of a mountain; which lay near the River, where the Stones lay very plenty, & the place full of holes, & where we found it almost impossible, for our horses to pass, without breaking their legs.    We passed along the Edge of this mountain with great difficulty, & came to a large Creek, which falls in, on the East side of the Columbia River; we proceeded up this Creek, & found plenty of wild or choak cherries and service berries.    One of our hunters killed a Deer on the Edge of the Mountain, which we had passed & which he brought to us in the evening; We came 15 Miles this day, & encamped on the Creek, where we found several Indian lodges, which we slept in


Clark's table of courses for August 31–September 4 are found with his entry of September 2, 1805.The route appears as a dotted line on Atlas map 67; at some points it is hard to distinguish from Clark's earlier route (marked "William Clark's route") on his Salmon River reconnaissance. Having crossed to the east side of the Lemhi, they proceeded down that river to the Salmon, raveled down that river and headed up Tower Creek. The campsite was, as Clark notes, some four miles up the creek, in Lemhi County, Idaho. Peebles (RW), 15, and fig. 13.Also called Salish Indians, see September 4.Probably Carmen Creek, Lemhi County, Idaho.Tower Creek, flowing into the Salmon River, Lemhi County, Idaho.Although this passage is obscure, the "south side" may refer to a proposed route along the Snake River in southern Idaho, with the "north side" referring to the route they actually took, up the North Fork Salmon River, down the Bitterroot River, and along the Lolo Trail to the Clearwater River. See Gass's entry of August 24, 1805, and also Lewis's entry of June 20, 1806. Possibly Gass, or McKeehan, is referring to the Lemhi and the Salmon rivers as the Columbia, and their route along the "north" (actually the east) side on this day.Tower Creek, flowing into the Salmon River, Lemhi County, Idaho.A few miles above the mouth of Tower Creek, Lemhi County.This is the last entry in this section of Whitehouse's original journal and ends near the top one-third of the page. The remainder of the page is filled with random scribbles, most of them Whitehouse's signature.The Salmon River, which the party considered to be the same as the the Lemhi, calling both Lewis's River.A few miles above the mouth of Tower Creek, Lemhi County.