March 21, 1805Clark
I return on the 21st and on my return I passed on the points of the high hills S. S. where I saw an emence quantity of Pumice Stone, and evident marks of the hills being on fire    I collected some Pumice Stone, burnt Stone & hard earth and put them into a furnace, the hard earth melted and glazed the other two a part of which i, e, the Hard Clay became a Pumice-Stone, I also collected a Plant the root of which is a Cure for the Bite of a mad dog & Snake which I shall Send—    Mr. Haney (I think it grows in the Blue R Barrens)    <Mr. I.>    the Indians make large Beeds of Different Colours—
Clark21st March Thursday 1805
a Cloudy Day    Some snow, the men Carried the remaining the 2 remained Canoes to the River, all except 3 left to take care & complete the Canoes, returned to the fort with their baggage, on my return to day to the Fort I came on the points of the high hills, Saw an emence quantity of Pumice Stone on the Sides & foot of the hills and emence beds of Pumice Stone near the Tops of the [hills] with evident marks of the Hill haveing once been on fire, I collected Some the differnt i e Stone Pumice Stone & a hard earth and put them into a furnace    the hard earth melted and glazed the others two and the hard Clay became a pumice Stone Glazed. I collected Some plants &c.

OrdwayThursday 21st March 1805. Cloudy.    the wind from the S. E.    about 2 oClock Capt. Clark and 4 men returned from the perogues.    had carried them all to the River and left three men with them to cork and take care of them.    a little Snow fell the after part of the day.—
Whitehouse
Thursday March 21st    This day we had still, pleasant Weather, nothing occur'd worth mentioning

Pumice is frothy volcanic glass. When heated in a furnace it will fuse; some clays, when heated to about 2000° F, expand and resemble somewhat the frothy volcanic rock.If Clark is referring to a stream which he knows, it may be the Big Blue or the Little Blue in Missouri. The plant is the purple coneflower. See December 16, 1804.The letters crossed out here can be read as "Mr J" or even "Mr G"; the sentence that follows is about the Indians' manufacture of glass beads, a subject they learned about from Joseph Garreau. "Mr J" or "Mr G" might therefore stand for his name.