June 21, 1806LewisSaturday June 21st 1806.
We collected our horses early set out on our return to the flatts.    we all felt some mortification in being thus compelled to retrace our steps through this tedious and difficult part of our rout, obstructed with brush and innumerable logs of fallen timber which renders the traveling distressing and even dangerous to our horses.    one of Thompson's horses is either choked this morning or has the distemper very badly I fear he is to be of no further servive to us.    an excellent horse of Cruzatte's snagged himself so badly in the groin in jumping over a parsel of fallen timber that he will evidently be of no further service to us.    at the pass of Collin's Creek we met two indians who were on their way over the mountain; they had brought with them the three horses and the mule that had left us and returned to the quawmash grounds.    these indians returned with us about ½ a mile down the creek where we halted to dine and graize or horses at the same place I had halted and remained all night with the party on the [blank] of Septembr last.    as well as we could understand the indians they informed us that they had seen Drewyer and Shannon and that they would not return untill the expiration of two days; the cause why Drewyer and Shannon had not returned with these men we are at a loss to account for.    we pressed these indians to remain with us and to conduct us over the mountain on the return of Drewyer and Shannon.    they consented to remain two nights for us and accordingly deposited their store of roots and bread in the bushes at no great distance and after dinner returned with us, as far as the little prarie about 2 miles distant from the creek, here they halted with their horses and informed us they would remain untill we overtook them or at least two nights. they had four supenumery horses with them.    we sent on four hunters a head to the quawmash flatts to take an evenings hunt; they so far succeeded as to kill one deer.    we left Reubin and J. Feilds at the Creek where we dined together with Sergt Gass in order to hunt about that place untill our return.    at seven in the evening we found ourselves once more at our old encampment where we shall anxious await the return of Drewyer and Shannon.—
ClarkSaturday June 21st 1806
We collected our horses early and Set out on our return to the flatts. we all felt Some mortification in being thus compelled to retrace our Steps through this tedious and difficuelt part of our rout, obstructed with brush and innumerable logs and fallen timber which renders the traveling distressing and even dangerous to our horses.    one of Thompsons horses is either choked this morning or has the distemper badly. I fear he is to be of no further Survice to us.    an excellent horse of Cruzatt's snagged himself So badly in the groin in jumping over a parcel of fallen timber that he will eventually be of no further Survice to us.    at the pass of Collin's Creek we met two indians who were on their way over the mountains, they had brought with them the three horses and the Mule which had left us and returned to the quawmash ground.    those indians returned with us about ½ mile down the Creek where we <expected> halted to dine and graze our horses.    as well as we Could understand the indians they informed us they had Seen Geo Drewyer & Shannon, and that they would not return untill the expiration of two days.    the cause why Drewyer & Shannon did not return with these men we are at a loss to account for.    we pressed those indians to remain with us and conduct us over the Mountains on the return of Drewyer & Shannon.    they consented to remain two nights for us and accordingly deposited their Stores of roots & Bread in the bushes at no great distance and after Dinner returned with us, as far as the little prarie about 2 Miles distance from the Creek, here they halted with their horses and informed us they would remain untill we overtook them or at least 2 nights.    they had four Supernoumery horses with them. We Sent on four hunters a head to the quawmash flats to make an evening hunt; they So far Suckceeded as to kill one deer. We left R. and Jo. Fields at the Creek where we dined, and Sergt. Gass in order to hunt about that place untill our return.    at 7 in the evening we found ourselves once more at our old encampment where we Shall anxiously await the return of Drewyer & Shannon.

Ordway
Saturday 21st June 1806.    a fair morning.    we got up our horses all except 4 which we expect has gone back to the Commass ground.    we Set out on our return to the Commass flat where we expect we can kill Some more meat to Start again with & to take us back in mount.    when we got down on Collinses Creek we met 2 Indians who were on their way to cross the mountn.    they had our 4 horses takeing them back to us    had 5 horses of their own and provision to last them across the mountains.    we halted and dined below the forks of Collinses Creek.    these 2 Indians told us that we could have went on if in case we could have found the road, for as the Snow bears up the horses all can cross the high parts which is covred So thick with Snow in about 3 days and our horses cannot git any thing to eat dureing that time.    we ascended the hill to the Samll prarie    the 2 Indians halted here to stay 2 or 3 days & wait for us to kill some meat & then pilot us across the Snow mountains. Sergt. Gass & the 2 Fields Stayed here to hunt.    we descended the mountain down to the Commass flat towards evening and Camped at the old Camping ground. Several went out a Short distance to hunt & came in at dark. Shields had killed & brought in one deer—


GassSaturday 21st.    We had again a fine morning; and we collected our horses in order to return to the Com-mas flat. We proceeded on to a creek, where we met two young Indians, who said they were come to go over the mountains with us. We halted here for dinner; after which, all our party proceeded on to Com-mas flat, except myself and two men who remained here to hunt. We wish to kill as much meat as will serve the party, until we get back where our loading was left, as we have plenty of roots there to serve us over the mountains. One of our best horses got snagged to-day, and was left here. The two Indians remained with us, and in the evening one of the men killed a deer.



 The camp of September 21, 1805, on Lolo Creek in Clearwater County, Idaho. Atlas map 71.Crane Meadows; see June 15, 1806. Peebles (RLC), 23.The camp of June 10–15, 1806, on Weippe Prarie ("quawmash flatts"). Peebles (LT), map; Atlas map 71.On Lolo Creek, Clearwater County, Idaho, where Lewis's party had camped on September 21, 1805.The Field brothers, say Lewis, Clark, and Ordway.Gass's hunting party remained at Crane Meadows, Clearwater County, Idaho. The rest 
of the party returned to Weippe Prairie.