December 25, 1805ClarkDecember 25th Christmas 1805 Wednesday
Some rain at different tmes last night and Showers of hail with intervales of fair Starr light, This morning at day we were Saluted by all our party under our winders, a Shout and a Song—    after brackfast we divided our tobacco which amounted to 2 Carrots, one half we gave to the party who used Tobaco those who did not we gave a Handkerchief as a present, The day proved Showery all day, the Inds. left us this evening—    all our party moved into their huts.    we dried Some of our wet goods. I rcved a present of a Fleeshe Hosery vest draws & Socks of Capt Lewis, pr. Mockerson of Whitehouse, a Small Indian basket of Guterich, & 2 Doz weasels tales of the Squar of Shabono, & Some black roots of the Indians    G. D. Saw a Snake passing across the parth
Our Diner to day Consisted of pore Elk boiled, Spilt [spoiled] fish & Some roots, a bad Christmass diner    worm Day
ClarkChristmas Wednesday 25th December 1805
at day light this morning we we[re] awoke by the discharge of the fire arm of all our party & a Selute, Shoute and a Song which the whole party joined in under our windows, after which they retired to their rooms were Chearfull all the morning—    after brackfast we divided our Tobacco which amounted to 12 carrots one half of which we gave to the men of the party who used tobacco, and to those who doe not use it we make a present of a handkerchief, The Indians leave us in the evening all the party Snugly fixed in their huts—    I recved a presnt of Capt L. of a fleece hosrie Shirt Draws and Socks—, a pr. mockersons of Whitehouse a Small Indian basket of Gutherich, two Dozen white weazils tails of the Indian woman, & Some black root of the Indians before their departure—    Drewyer informs me that he Saw a Snake pass across the parth to day.    The day proved Showerey wet and disagreeable.
we would have Spent this day the nativity of Christ in feasting, had we any thing either to raise our Sperits or even gratify our appetites, our Diner concisted of pore Elk, So much Spoiled that we eate it thro' mear necessity, Some Spoiled pounded fish and a fiew roots.
Ordway
Wednesday 25th Decr. 1805.    rainy & wet.    disagreeable weather.    we all moved in to our new Fort, which our officers name Fort Clotsop after the name of the Clotsop nation of Indians who live nearest to us.    the party Saluted our officers by each man firing a gun at their quarters at day break this morning.    they divided out the last of their tobacco among the men that used and the rest they gave each a Silk hankerchief, as a Christmast gift, to keep us in remembrence of it as we have no ardent Spirits, but are all in good health which we esteem more than all the ardent Spirits in the world.    we have nothing to eat but poore Elk meat and no Salt to Season that with but Still keep in good Spirits as we expect this to be the last winter that we will have to pass in this way.—

GassWednesday 25th.    Was another cloudy wet day.— This morning we left our 
camp and moved into our huts. At daybreak all the men paraded and fired a round of small arms, wishing the Commanding Officers a merry Christmas. In the course of the day Capt. Lewis and  Capt. Clarke collected what tobacco remained, and divided it amongst those who used tobacco, as Christmas-gift; to the others they gave handkerchiefs in lieu of it. We had no spirituous liquors to elevate our spirits this Christmas; but of this we had but little need, as we were all in very good health. Our living is not very good; meat is in plenty, but of an ordinary quality, as the elk are poor in this part of the country. We have no kind of provisions but meat, and we are without salt to season that.
The 26th, 27th and 28th, were cloudy with rain. We found our huts smoked; there being no chimneys in them except in the officers' rooms. The men were therefore employed, except some hunters who went out, in making chimnies to the huts. In the evening of the 27th we were informed that a large fish, answering to the description of a whale, was driven upon shore. In the forenoon of the 28th six men started for the sea shore to make salt, as we have none in the fort. Two hunters returned, having killed a deer, and three went out to hunt.Whitehouse
Wednesday Decemr. 25th    We had hard rain & Cloudy weather as usual.    We all moved into our new Garrison or Fort, which our Officers named after a nation of Indians who resided near us, called the Clatsop Nation; Fort Clatsop.—    We found our huts comfortable, excepting smoaking a little.—
We saluted our officers, by each of our party firing off his gun at day break in honor to the day (Christmass[)]    Our Officers in return, presented to each of the party that used Tobacco a part of what Tobacco they had remaining; and to those who did not make use of it, they gave a handerchief or some other article, in remembrance of Christmass.    We had no ardent spirit of any kind among us; but are mostly in good health, A blessing, which we esteem more, than all the luxuries this life can afford, and the party are all thankful to the Supreme Being, for his goodness towards us.—    hoping he will preserve us in the same, & enable us to return to the United States again in safety.    We have at present nothing to eat but lean Elk meat & that without Salt, but the whole of our party are content with this fare.—


"Fleece hosiery"; woolen, made of fleece, or perhaps fleece-lined.Presumably the long-tailed weasel, Mustela frenata. Hall, 2:993–99.Clark names only five: Joseph Field, Bratton, Gibson, Willard, and Weiser.Clark gives the names of the hunters: Drouillard, Shannon, Labiche, Reubin Field, and 
Collins.