November 10, 1805ClarkNovember 10th Sunday 1805
rained verry hard the greater part of the last night & Continus this morning, the wind has layed and the Swells are fallen.    we loaded our Canoes and proceeded on, passed a Deep Bay on the Stard. Side I Call [blank]S. W.  8miles to point on the Stard. Side    passed a deep Bay and
6 points on the Stard. Side   	rained hard Saw enoumurable
quantites of Sea guls and Ducks 10 
The wind rose from the N W. and the Swells became So high, we were Compelled to return about 2 miles to a place where we Could unld. our Canoes, which was in a Small Bay on Driftwood, on which we had also to make our fires to dry our Selves as well as we could the Shore being either a Clift of Purpendicular rocks or Steep assents to the hight of 4 or 500 feet, we continued on this drift wood untill about 3 oClock when the evening appearing favourable we loaded & Set out in hopes to turn the Point below and get into a better harber, but finding the waves & Swells continue to rage with great fury below, we got a Safe place for our Stores & a much beter one for the Canoes to lie and formed a Campment on Drift logs in the Same little Bay under a high hill at the enterence of a Small drean which we found verry convt. on account of its water, as that of the river is Brackish—    The logs on which we lie is all on flote every high tide—    The rain Continud all day—    we are all wet, also our beding and many other articles.    we are all employed untill late drying our bedding.    nothing to eate but Pounded fish
ClarkNovember 10th Sunday 1805
Rained verry hard the greater part of last night and continues this morning.    the wind has luled and the waves are not high; we loaded our canoes and proceeded on    passed Several Small and deep nitch on the Stard. Side, we proceeded on about 10 miles    Saw great numbers of Sea Guls, the wind rose from the N. W. and the waves became So high that we were compelled to return about 2 miles to a place we Could unload our Canoes, which we did in a Small nitch at the mouth of a Small run on a pile of drift logs where we Continued untill low water, when the river appeared calm we loaded and Set out; but was obliged to return finding the waves too high for our Canoes to ride, we again unloaded the Canoes, and Stoed the loading on a rock above the tide water, and formed a camp on the Drift Logs which appeared to be the only Situation we could find to lie, the hills being either a perpendicular Clift, or Steep assent, riseing to about 500 feet—    our Canoes we Secured as well as we could—    we are all wet the rain haveing continued all day, our beding and maney other articles, employ our Selves drying our blankets—    nothing to eate but dried fish pounded which we brought from the falls.    we made 10 miles today—
Ordway
Sunday 10th Nov. 1805.    considerable of rain fell last night.    a rainy morning.    the waves not So high as yesterdy    we loaded the canoes and Set out and went on    passed high clifts of rocks, and fine Springs.    we Saw porpises in the River. Saw a number of Sea otter, Sea gulls, ducks &C.    continued raining hard    abt. noon the wind rose So high that obledged us to turn back from a point of rocks and roe about 2 miles back into a cove before we could git a place to unload the canoes.    we got in to the harbour and unloaded the canoes and Stayed untill towards evening.    then loaded again thinking to find a Safer harbour.    we went on a Short distance to a Spring run where we Camped.    the wind contind. So high that we could not proceed.    the hills and pine timber make close to the River on each Side.    we had Scarsely room for to camp.—


GassSunday 10th.    We had a rainy morning, but the wind was not so high as it had been yesterday; and we set out from Cape Swell, coasted along 8 miles, passed some high cliffs of sandy rocks, and then came to a point; where we found the swells so high, the wind having risen, that we could not proceed; so we had to return back about a mile to get a safe harbour. Here we dined on some pounded salmon, that we had procured from the Indians; and unloaded our canoes. After we had been here about 2 hours, it became more calm, and we loaded the canoes again, but could not get round the point, the swells were still so high; we therefore put too at a branch of fresh water, under high cliffs of rocks and unloaded again. Here we scarcely had room to lie between the rocks and water; but we made shift to do it among some drift wood that had been beat up by the tide. It rained hard all night, and was very disagreeable. While on our way down today, we saw some porpoises, sea otter and a great many sea gulls. The water is become very salt.


Whitehouse
Sunday Novemr. 10th    We had rain the greater part of last night & a wet rainey morning, but the Waves did not run so high as they did Yesterday.    We loaded our Canoes & set out.    We proceeded on, and passed high hills with pine trees growing on them, some high Clifts of rocks & several fine Springs of fresh water.    We saw in the River a number of Porpoises, & Sea Otters, Sea Gulls & Ducks in the greatest abundance.    We continued on our way, it raining hard on us, 'till about noon; when it ceased.    The Waves then ran so high that we had to turn back and went up the River about 2 Miles, before we could find a harbour to unload the Canoes.    We at last found a convenient place, at which we unloaded our Canoes.    We halted at that place, where we staid till towards evening, when we loaded our Canoes again, and proceedd on up the River in hopes to find a safer harbour, than 
the one that we had left.    We went a small distance from the place we left, & came to a large Spring run; lying on the South side, in a bend of the River, where we stopped & Encamped.    we again unloaded the Canoes, & had scarcely room to lay down, the hills making in so close to the River.    We went about 7 Miles this day, our course being nearly West.—


They remained at this campsite until November 15 except for a short move on November 12; it was on the eastern side of Point Ellice, Pacific County, Washington, east of the Astoria Bridge and near the town of Meglar. Appleman (LC), 360: Atlas maps 82, 89.The harbor, or common, porpoise, Phocoena phocoena.The gulls could be any of a number of species of Larus.On the eastern side of Point Ellice, Pacific County, Washington, near the town of Meglar, where they stayed until November 15 except for a short move on November 12.