December 2, 1805ClarkDecember 2nd Monday 1805
Cloudy and Some little rain this morning    I despatched 3 men to hunt and 2 and my Servent in a Canoe to a Creek above to try & Catch Some fish—    I am verry unwell  the drid fish which is my only diet does not agree with me and Several of the men Complain of a lax, and weakness—    I expect Capt. Lewis will return to day with the hunters and let us know if Elk or deer Can be found Sufficent for us to winter on, If he does not come I Shall move from this place, to one of better prospects for game &c.    Joseph Fields came home with the marrow bones of an Elk which he had killed 6 miles distant, I sent out 6 men in a canoe for the meat, the evening being late they did not return this night, which proved fair moon Shineing night—    This is the first Elk we have killed on this Side the rockey mounts    a great deal of Elk Sign in the neighbourhood—
ClarkMonday 2nd December 1805
Cloudy with Some rain this morning    I Send out three men to hunt & 2 & my man york in a Canoe up the Ke-ke-mar-que Creek in Serch of fish and fowl—    I feel verry unwell, and have entirely lost my appetite for the Dried pounded fish which is in fact the cause of my disorder at present—    The men are generally Complaining of a lax and gripeing—    In the evening Joseph Field came in with the Marrow bones of a elk which he killed at 6 miles distant, this welcome news to us.    I dispatched Six men in a empty Canoe with Jo:    mediately for the elk which he Said was about 3 miles from the water    this is the first Elk which has been killd. on this Side of the rockey mountains—    Jo Fields givs me an account of a great deel of Elk Sign & Says he Saw 2 Gangs of those Animals in his rout, but it rained So hard that he could not Shoot them—    The party up the Creek returned without any thing and informs me they could not See any fish in the Creek to kill and the fowls were too wild to be killed, this must be owing to their being much hunted and pursued by the Indians in their Canoes.
Ordway
Monday 2nd Decr. 1805.    a Cloudy wet morning. Several men went out a hunting.    one of them returned towards evening.    had killed an Elk    Six men went with a canoe after the meat—


GassMonday 2nd.    The day was agin cloudy and wet. Some of the hunters went out in the morning; and in the afternoon one of them came in, after killing a fine elk. A party of the men went out to bring in the meat, which is a very seasonable supply, a number complaining of the bad effects of the fish diet. Neither the hunters nor the men, who went for the meat returned. In the evening the weather became clear, and we had a fine night.


Whitehouse
Monday decemr. 2nd    A cloudy wet morning.    Several of our Men went out hunting.    They returned towards evening.    One of the hunters had killed an elk & had come to Camp to get help for to bring it in to us.    Six Men were sent off with a Canoe after the Meat, the road being so bad by land, that it was impossible to bring it that way.    This party & two of our hunters staid out all night


Joseph Field, Pryor, and Gibson.Joseph Field, Pryor, and Gibson went hunting; Field returned that evening.Joseph Field, Pryor, and Gibson; York and two others went in a canoe looking for "fish and Fowl."Joseph Field.Joseph Field, Pryor, and Gibson; York and two others went in a canoe looking for "fish and fowl."Joseph Field.