December 30, 1805ClarkDecember 30th Monday 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night, this morning fair and the Sun Shown for a Short time    4 Indians Came from the upper Villages    they offered us roots which we did not Chuse to axcept of, as their expectations for those presents of a fiew roots is 3 or 4 times their real worth, those Indians with those of yesterday Continued all day. Drewyer & party of hunters returned and informed they had killed 4 Elk, a party of 6 men was imediately Sent for the meet, they returned at Dusk, with the 4 Elk, of which we had a Sumptious Supper of Elk Tongues & marrow bones which was truly gratifying.
The fort was Completed this evening and at Sun Set we let The Indians know that, our Custom will be to Shut the gates at Sun Set, at which time, they must all go out of the fort    those people who are verry foward and disegreeable, left the huts with reluctiance—    This day proved the best we have had Since at this place, only 3 Showers of rain to day, Cloudy nearly all day, in the evening the wind luled and the fore part of the night fair and clear. I Saw flies & different kinds of insects in motion to day    Snakes are yet to be seen, and Snales without Cover is Common and large, fowls of every kind Common to this quarter abound in the Creek & Bay near us
ClarkMonday 30th December 1805
Hard wind and Some rain last night.    this morning the Sun Shown for a Short time—    four Indians came down from the War cia cum Village, they offered us roots which we did not think proper to accept of as in return they expect 3 or 4 times as much as the roots as we Could purchase the Roots for, and are never Satisfied with what they receive, those 4 Indians & these that Came yesterday stayed all day. Drewyer returned and informed that he had killed 4 Elk at no great distance off, a party of 6 men was imediately dispatched for the meat, and returned at Dusk with the 4 Elk—    we had a Sumptious Supper of Elks tongues & marrow bones which was truly gratifying—    our fortification is Completed this evening—and at Sun Set we let the nativs know that our Custom will be in future, to Shut the gates at Sun Set at which time all Indians must go out of the fort and not return into it untill next morning after Sunrise at which time the gates will be opened, those of the War ci a cum Nation who are very foward left the houses with reluctianc    this day proved to be the fairest and best which we have had since our arrival at this place, only three Showers dureing this whole day, wind the fore part of the day.
Ordway
Monday 30th Decr. 1805.    a fair morning and a little Sun shine which is verry uncommon at this place.    we finished puting up our pickets and gates of the fort.    about 2 oClock P. M. three hunters came to the fort    had killed 4 Elk. Seven men Set out immediately and brought in the meat.    a centinel placed in the fort to look out for the Savages for our Safety, &C.— 


GassMonday 30th.    Heavy showers of rain fell last night, but the morning was fair, and we had some sunshine, which happens very seldom; light showers of rain fell during the day. About 2 o'clock the three hunters that first went out came in; and had killed four elk. Seven men went out immediately and brought them into the fort safe, which was a pleasing sight, the meat we had on hand being spoiled. This evening we completely finished our fortification.


Whitehouse
Monday Decemr 30th    We had several showers of Rain during last night, and this morning was fair; and the Sun shone a little which was very uncommon to us.—    Our Men finished putting up the Pickets & Gates of the Fort.    About 2 o'Clock P. M. three of our hunters came in to the fort, who informed us that they had killed 4 Elk but a Short distance from the Fort.    Seven Men set out immediately with them from the Fort; and took a Canoe & brought in the meat.    This supply of Meat came very seasonably, as what meat we have in hand, is nearly spoiled    Our Officers placed a Centinel in the Fort.—



The remainder of this day's entry in the Elkskin-bound Journal comes after the December 31 entry, the link being indiated by the repetition of "luled."Pacific (or Columbia) woods slug, Ariolimax columbianus.Including Drouillard, according to Clark.Including Drouillard.Clark names Drouillard as one of them.