June 9, 1806LewisMonday June 9th 1806.
This morning we had all our horses brought up and indeavoured to exchange five or shix with the Indians in consequence of their having unsound backs but succeeded in exchanging one only. Hohâstillpilp with several of the natives who visited us yesterday took leave of us and set out for the plains near Lewis's river where the nation are about to assemble themselves. The broken arm made us a short visit this morning and took leave of us, being about to set out with his village today in order to join the nation at their rendezvouz on Lewis's R. The Cutnose or Neeshneeparkkeeook borrowed a horse and rode down the Kooskooske River a few miles this morning in quest of some young eagles which he intends raising for the benifit of their feathers; he returned soon after with a pair of young Eagles of the grey kind; they were nearly grown and prety well feathered.    in the evening the young Chief who gave both Capt. C. and myself a horse some time since, came to our camp with a party of young men and remained all night.    this evening one of our party obtained a very good horse for an indifferent one by giving the indian an old leather shirt in addition.    we eat the last of our meat yesterday evening and have lived on roots today.    our party seem much elated with the idea of moving on towards their friends and country, they all seem allirt in their movements today; they have every thing in readiness for a move, and notwithstanding the want of provision have been amusing themselves very merrily today in runing footraces pitching quites, prison basse &c.    the river has been falling for several days and is now lower by near six feet than it has been; this we view as a strong evidence that the great body of snow has left the mountains, though I do not conceive that we are as yet loosing any time as the roads is in many parts extreemly steep rocky and must be dangerous is wet and slippry; a few days will dry the roads and will also improve the grass.—by octant ☉'s L. L. 51 20' June 9th 1806  June 9th 1806.  Error of the Sextant 6' 15—    or Subtraction   Error of Octant by back observation on}2° 30' 4.5" + aadditivethe distant fragment of the broken limbClarkModay June 9th 1806	
We had all of our horses brought up and attempted to exchange our Sore back and most indifferent horses with the indians for Sound back horses, we exchanged one only. Hohasillpilp took his leave of us and Set out for the Plains of Lewises river, with Several of the nativs who Visited us yesterday. The broken arm came over and continued a fiew minits with us this morning, and also took his leave of us & Set out with his Village for the plains of Lewis's river. The Cut nose borrowed a horse and rode down the flathead river a fiew miles to take Some young Eagles, which he intends to raise for their feathers.    in the evening one of the young Chiefs who had given both Capt Lewis and my Self a horse came to our camp accompanied by 10 of his people and continued with us all night.    one of our men exchanged a very indefferent horse for a very good one.    our party exolted with the idea of once more proceeding on towards their friends and Country are elert in all their movements and amuse themselves by pitching quates, Prisoners bast running races &c—. The flat head river is Still falling fast and nearly as low as it was at the time we arrived at this place.    this fall of water is what the nativs have informed us was a proper token for us.    when this river fell the Snows would be Sufficiently melted for us to Cross the Mountains.    the greater length of time we delayed after that time, the higher the grass would grow on th Mountains—.

Ordway
Monday 9th June 1806.    a number of the natives Stayed with us last night.    a chief we call cut nose went Some distance after young Eagles.    got Several by climbing a tree by a rope.    the feathers of these eagles the Indians make head dresses war like & paint them & is a great thing among them.    we got up our horses and hobbled them as we intend to moove to morrow.

GassMonday 9th.    This was a fine plesant day. We caught all our horses and hoopled them, so that we might get them easily to-morrow. We also exchanged some mares with young colts, and some of the horses who had not got quite well, for others more capable of bearing the fatigue of crossing the mountains.


Pitching quoits, flattened rings, at a pin. Criswell, 70.Lewis's observation from the front flyleaf of this notebook, Codex L.Clark mistakenly writes "flathead river" when he actually means Kooskooske, the captains' name for the Clearwater River.Hobbled.