July 10, 1804ClarkJuly 10th Tuesday    Set out this morning with a view to Land near the fire Seen last night, & recornetre, but Soon discovered that our men were at the fire, they were a Sleep early last evening, and from the Course of the Wind which blew hard, their yells were not hea[r]d by party in the perogue, a mistake altogether—.    proceeded on, passed [hole] Prarie on the upper Side of Woolf River, at 4 miles passed (1) a Small Creek L. S. Called [hole] R. Pape    this Creek is about 15 yds. Wide—and called after a Spanierd who killed himself at th[e] mouth.    (2) Dined on an Island Called de Selamen and delayed 3 hours, and proceeded on, opposit this Isld. on the L. S. is a (3) butifull Bottom Prarie whuch will Contain about 2000 acres of Land covered with wild rye & wild Potatoes, gread numbers of Goslings on the Banks & in the Ponds near the river, Capt Lewis Killed two this evening, we came to & Camped for the night, at a point on the S. S. opposit a yellow Clay Clift.—    our men all getting well but much fatigued, the river is on a Stand nether rise nor fall, The bottom on the S. S. is verry extensive & thick.    the Hills or high land is near the river on the L. S. and but thinly timbered, back of those hills is open plains.Course Distance & Reffrs. July 10thN. 80° W.  3 ¼ms. to the Starboard Point    passed a Sand BarN. 19 E  2ms to a point on the L S.    passed a Creek (1)North     ¾Me. to Lower point of an Island (2)S. 80° W.     ¾ms to a pt. on the Left side of the Island opsd. a prarie (3)N. 50° W.  1 ¼me to a pt on the P: L. S    passed a bad Sand barN. 83° W.  2me. to a pt. S. S.— 10 Miles ClarkJuly 10th Tuesday 1804
Set out early this morning and Crossd the river with a view to See who the party was that Camped on the other Side, we Soon discovered them to be our men,—    proceeded on passed a Prarie on the L. S. at 4 miles passed a Creek L. S Called (1) <Pappie> [NB: Pape's Creek] after a man who Killed himself at its mouth, this Creek is 15 yds wide—    (2) Dined on an Isld. Called <de Salamin> [NB: Solomon's Island]    Delayed 3 hours on this Island to recruit the men    opposit on the L. S. is a butifull bottom Plain of about 2000 acres (3)    Covered with wild rye & Potatoes, [NB: ground apple; pomme de terre] intermix't with the grass, we camped on the S. S. opposit a yellow Clay Clift, Capt. Lewis Killed t[w]o young Gees or Goslings this evening—    The men of the party getting better, but much fatigued—    The river on a Stand—    The bottom is verry extensive on the S. S. and thickly intersperced with Vines
The High Land approaches near the river on the L. S. and well timbered next to the river, back of those hills the Plains Commence.Course Distance & refrs. July 10thN. 80° W.  3 ¼Ms. to pt. S. S.    passd. a Sand barN 19° E.  2ms. to pt. L. S.    pasd. a Creek (1)North     ¾me. to Low: pt. of an Isld. (2)S. 80° W.     ¾me. to pt. on left of an Isd. opsd. Pra (3)N 50 W.  1 ¼ms. to pt. on L. S.    passed Sd. barN 83 W.  2ms. to a pt. on S. S. Isd (5) 10 Ordway

Tuesday July 10th 1804.    we Set out this morning with a view to land near where we Saw the Seen last night & to reconortre but Soon Discovered that our men were at the fire, they were a Sleep eairly last night and did not know that we Sent for them by the pearogue, proceeded on    passed a prarie on the upper side of woolf Creek or River    at 4 miles passed a Small called River pake    this Creek is about 15 yd. wide, and called after a Spaniard who killed himself at the mouth, at noon we dined on an Island called De Selamen and Delayed 3 hours.    proceeded on    opposite this Island on the South Side is a beuautiful Bottom prarie which will contain about 2000
acres of Land covered with wild rye and wild potatoes.    Great numbers of Goslins on the Banks and on the Ponds near the River. Capt M. Lewis killed 2 this evening    we came too & Camped for the night on the north Side opposite a Yellow Clay Clifts.—    the Bottoms on the north Side is verry extensive & thick    the hills or high Land is near the River on South Side & are but thinly timbered    back of those hills is open prarie.

Floyd
Tuesday July 10th    Set out when we Could See, about us, when we Came to the place it was ouer men which had Left us two days ago, much feteged had Lay down and fell asleap    passed a Small Creek on the South Side Called pape Creek    it Comes through Bottom Land    it is Called after a man who by drawning his Gun out of the Boat Shot him Self    passed Som Strong water    Campt on the north Side    the Land is good
	                                 
GassTuesday 10th.    We set out early this morning and had a fair day and fair wind. There is a handsome prairie on the south side opposite an island. We encamped on the north side.


Whitehouse
Tusday 10    Got On Our way at woolf River at Sun Rise    the water was Strong the Morning was Clear.    On the E. S. of the River whare Stopd to take breakfast the willd. Rice was pleanty    Groeing on the bank of the River, Straberyes, Rosies, Red And white    Roed 11 Miles    Campd. at 
[blank]    the hunters Came in    brought 2 deer with them—
Tuesday July 10th    This morning at Sunrise we got under way from  Little Wolf River, we found the current still setting strong against us, & very hard rowing to stem it, we encamped for a while to refresh ourselves at 8 oClock A. M.; we found here wild Rice, strawberry's and Red & white Roses <and Strawberry's> growing along the bank of the River, at 10 oClock A. M. we proceeded on, and in the evening encamped on the bank of the River where our hunters came in to us, having 2 Deer with them which they had killed.    We rowed this day 11 Miles.—

                       
Probably later Cedar Creek, Doniphan County, Kansas. MRC map 18.Obviously a reference to Solomon's Island, which appears in Nicollet at the right place. MRC map 18 shows it near the mouth of Nodaway River. Clark could have been misinformed and led Nicollet into error through Biddle, but the captain indicates on July 9, 1804, that one of the bowmen had spent considerable time in the area. It is likely that the name itself shifted over the years, through mapmakers' errors or some other reason. The name might be from Salomin or Solomon Petit, who engaged in trade with the Poncas in the 1790s. McDermott (WCS), 149; Nicollet (MMR), 376; MRC maps 18, 19.Wild rye is Elymus canadensis L., Canada wildrye, judging from the habitat description. Likewise, "potatoes" (Apios americana, Indian potato, ground nut), are found in similar habitat. Both are typical of moist, subirrigated soil that is subject to periodic flooding. See Lewis's description in an undated entry. Steyermark, 130, 947; Weaver, 34–35.If the river's course remains the same, a camp on the starboard side would be in Holt County, Missouri. The site would be near the Nebraska-Kansas boundary on the opposite shore. MRC map 19.The mileage figures are much altered and overwritten. At the end of the course material (the bottom of the page of document 30) is this course, apparently having no relationship to surrounding material: S. 66 W.Biddle apparently crossed out phrases in this entry to substitute his own."Pape" Creek to Clark and Floyd; it is probably later Cedar Creek, Doniphan County, Kansas.See Clark's entry of this day for the possible identity of this island.No one else mentions wild rice, but Clark and Ordway note wild rye, probably Canada wildrye, Elymus canadensis L.Wild strawberry, Fragaria virginiana var. illinoensis (Prince) Gray.An unknown rose, Rosa sp.