December 14, 1805ClarkDecember 14th Saturday 1805
a cloudy day & rained moderately all day    we finish the log works of our building, the Indians leave us to day after Selling a Small Sea otter Skin and a roabe, Send 4 men to Stay at the Elk which is out in the woods &c.
ClarkSaturday 14th December 1805
The Day Cloudy and rained moderately all day    we finish the log work of our building, the Indians leae us to day after Selling a Small Sea otter Skin and a roab, dispatch 4 men to the Elk out in the woods with derections to delay untill the party <went> goes up tomorrow.    all employd in finishing a house to put meat into.    all our last Supply of Elk has Spoiled in the repeeted rains which has been fallen ever Since our arrival at this place, and for a long time before, Scerce one man in Camp Can bost of being one day dry Since we landed at this point, the Sick getting better, my man York Sick with Cholick & gripeing
Ordway
Saturday 14th Decr 1805.    continues wet and rainy.    we continued on with the huts.    2 men employed Splitting out plank to cover our huts with.    we finished raiseing the other line of huts & began covring one room for a meat house.—

GassSaturday 14th.    The two hunters that had killed the elk, went back with two other men to take care of the meat. In the course of the day a good deal of rain fell; the weather here still continues warm, and there has been no freezing, except a little white frost. In the afternoon, the savages all went away. We completed the building of our huts, 7 in number, all but the covering, which I now find will not be so difficult as I expected; as we have found a kind of timber in plenty, which splits freely, and makes the finest puncheons I have ever seen. They can be split 10 feet long and two broad, not more than an inch and an half thick.


Whitehouse
Saturday Decemr 14th    This day we had moderate Rain.    We continued on getting our Huts raised.—    Two of our party were employed in splitting plank to cover them.    We finished raising the line of huts, & began to cover one of them, which Our officers intend for a Meat house &ca.—

Opinions differ on this tree, but it is most likely grand fir; see Clark's entry for December 13, and Lewis's description of February 6, 1806.