February 3, 1806LewisMonday February 3rd 1806.
About three o'clock Drewyer and La Page, returned; Drewyer had killed seven Elk in the point below us, several miles distant but can be approached with in ¾ of a mile with canoes by means of a small creek which discharges itself into the bay on this side of the Clatsop village direct Sergt. pryor to go in quest of the meat, the wind was so high that they were unable to set out untill a little before sunset, when they departed; at 10 P. M. they return excessively could and informed us that they could not make land on this side of the bay nor get into the creek in consequence of the tide being out and much lower than usual.    we are apprehensive that the Clatsops who know where the meat is will rob us of a part if not the whole of it.    at half after 4 P. M. Sergt Gass returned with his party, they brought with them the flesh of four other Elk which the hunters had found, being a part of the ten which were killed up the Netul river the other day.    he left R. Fields, Shannon and Labuish to continue the hunt and made an appointment to return to them on Friday.    late in the evening the four men who had been sent to assist the saltmakers in transporting meat which they had killed to their camp, also returned, and brought with them all the salt which had been made, consisting of about one busshel only.    with the means we have of boiling the salt water we find it a very tedious opperation, that of making salt, notwithstanding we keep the kettles boiling day and night.    we calculate on three bushels lasting us from hence to our deposits of that article on the Missouri.
ClarkMonday February 3rd 1806		     
About 3 oClock Drewyer & Lapage returned, Drewyer had killed Seven Elk in the point below us, Several miles distant, but Can be approached within ¾ of a mile with Canoes by means of a Small Creak which discharges itself into the Bay, on this Sid of the Clatsop Village. Directed Serjt. Pryor to go in quest of the meat, the winds was So high that they were unable to Set out untill a little before Sunset, when they departed; at 10 P. M. they returned excessively Cold and informed us that they could not make land on this Side of the bay or get into the Creek in consequence of the tides being out and much lower than usial.    we are apprehensive that the Clatsops knowing where the meat is, will rob us of a part if not the whole of it.    at half after 4 P. M Sergt. Gass returned with his party they brought with them the flesh of 4 other Elk which the hunters had found, being part of the 10 which were killed up the Netul river the other day. He left Ro. Field, Shannon & Labiesh to Continue the hunt, and made an appointment to return to them on friday.    late in the evening the four men who had been Sent to assist the Saltmakers in transporting meat which they had killed to their Camp also returned, and brought with them all the Salt which had been made, consisting of about one Sushel only.    with the means we have of boiling the Salt water we find it a very tegious opperation that of makeing Salt, notwithstanding the Kittles are kept boiling day and night.    we Calculate on three bushels lasting us from hiere to our deposit of that article on the Missouri.
Ordway
Monday 3rd Feby. 1806.    a little frozen rain.    about noon George Drewyer & Batteast came in from hunting had killed Seven Elk & caught one large beaver. Six men Set out with a canoe after the meat, but the wind So high that obledged them to return    five men came in from the Salt works with about 2 bushels of good Salt, and Some whail meat which the natives call Ecoley.    we mix it with our poor Elk meat & find it eats verry well.—


GassMonday 3rd.    Some light showers of rain fell in the course of last night; and this day is still somewhat wet and cloudy. One of our hunters came in, who had killed seven elk, and returned with a party and a canoe to bring in the meat. We are fortunate in getting as much meat as we can eat; but we have no other kind of provisions.


Whitehouse
Monday Febry 3rd    We had a little frost, & the weather has moderated since Yesterday.    About noon two of our hunters came to the fort from hunting.    they informed us that they had killed 7 Elk & caught 1 Large beaver.    Six of our Men set out with a Canoe to go after the Elk meat, but soon returned the wind being too high for them to proceed, down to the Bay.    In the evening they attempted it again, but the tide was so low that they could not get near the Shore, for the sholes & sand Barrs.    five men came in from the Salt camp, with 2 bushels of Salt & the flesh of part a whale which we found tolerably good eating.—    The natives call the whale meat E-Co-ley.—

The point is presumably Point Adams at the mouth of the Columbia in Clatsop County, Oregon. The creek might be Skipanon River; Coues (HLC), 2:797, suggests Alder or Tansey Creek. The bay is Youngs Bay. Atlas map 82.Lepage.Directed by Pryor, report Lewis and Clark.The Lower Chinookan term for "whale," íkuli.Drouillard and Lepage both returned, according to Lewis and Clark.