January 2, 1806LewisThursday, January 2nd 1806
Sent out a party of men and brought in the two Elk which were killed yesterday. Willard and Wiser have not yet returned nor have a party of hunters returned who set out on the 26th Ulto.    the Indians who visited yesterday left us at 1 P M today after having disposed of their roots and berries for a few fishinghooks and some other small articles.    we are infested with swarms of flees already in our new habitations; the presumption is therefore strong that we shall not devest ourselves of this intolerably troublesome vermin during our residence here. The large, and small or whistling swan, sand hill Crane, large and small gees, brown and white brant, Cormorant, duckan mallard, Canvisback duck, and several other species of ducks, still remain with us; tho' I do not think that they are as plenty oas on our first arrival in the neighbourhood. Drewyer visited his traps and took an otter.    the fur of both the beaver and otter in this country are extreemly good; those annamals are tolerably plenty near the sea coast, and on the small Creeks and rivers as high as the grand rappids, but are by no means as much so as on the upper part of the Missouri.
ClarkJanuary 2nd Thursday 1806.
A Cloudy rainey morning after a wet night.    dispatched 12 Men for the two Elk Killed yesterday which they brought in at 11 oClock.    the day proved Cloudy and wet, the Indians left us at 1 oClock P. M, Drewyer visited his traps which had one otter in one of them. The flees are verry troublesom, our huts have alreadey Sworms of those disagreeable insects in them, and I fear we Shall not get rid of them dureing our delay at this place.
ClarkThursday 2nd of January 1806.
Sent out a party of men and brought in the two Elk which was killed yesterday.    Willard & Wiser have not yet returned nor have a party of hunters who Set out on the 26th ulto:  the Indians who visited us yesterday left us at 1 P. M to day after haveing disposed of their roots and berries for a fiew fishing hooks and Some other Small articles.    we are infestd. with Sworms of flees already in our new habatations; the presumption is therefore Strong that we Shall not devest our Selves of this intolerably troulesom vermin dureing our residence here. The large, & Small or whistling Swan, Sand hill crane, large & Small Gees, brown and white brant, Comorant, Duckanmallard, canvis back duck, and several other Species of Ducks Still remain with us; tho' I doe not think they are as plenty as on our first arrival in the neighbourhood. Drewyer visit his traps at took out an otter.    the fur of both the beaver and otter as also the rackoon in this countrey are extreemly good; those animals are tolerably plenty near the Sea coast, on the Small creeks and rivers as high as the grand Rapids.—

Ordway
Thursday 2nd Jany. 1806.    rained the greater part of last night and continues this morning    14 men went out and brought in the meat    our officers issued an order for the regulation of the Garrison at this place, charging the party to treat the natives will &C.—


GassThursday 2nd.    This also was a cloudy wet day. Fourteen men went out in the morning and brought the meat of the elk into the Fort.

Whitehouse
Thursday Janry 2d    It rained the greater part of last night, and continued to rain hard this morning.    fourteen of our Men went out from the Fort, & brought in the Elk meat, which our hunters had killed Yesterday.    We had hard Showers of rain during this whole day.    Our Commanding Officers Issued an Order, for the Regulating of our Fort.    We are expecting 2 Men of our party to arrive at the fort from the Ocean, where we are making Salt with some of that article, as we are entirely without


Otter, Lutra canadensis. Burroughs, 75–76.A red vertical line is drawn through this passage about birds, perhaps by Biddle.The order was issued January 1; see the Orderly Book entry at that date with Lewis's and Clark's materials.See the Orderly Book entry with Lewis and Clark's materials for this day.