May 30, 1806LewisFriday May 30th 1806.Lapage and Charbono set out to the indian vilages early this morning for the purpose of trading with them for roots; Sergt. Gass was sent this morning to obtain some goats hair to stuff the padds of our saddles.    he ascended the river on this side and being unable to pass the river opposite to the village he wished to visit, returned in the evening unsuccessfull. Shannon and Collins were permitted to pass the river in order to trade with the natives and lay in a store of roots and bread for themselves with their proporiton of the merchandize as the others had done; in landing on the opposite shore the canoe was driven broad side with the full forse of a very strong current against some standing trees and instantly filled with water and sunk. Potts who was with them in an indifferent swimer, it was with much difficulty he made the land.    they lost three blankets a blanket coat and their pittance of merchandize.    in our bear state of clootheing this was a serious loss. I sent Sergt. Pryor and a party over with the indian canoe in order to raise and secure ours but the debth of the water and the strength of the current baffled every effort. I fear that we have also lost our canoe.    all our invalides are on the recovery.    we gave the sick Cheif a severe sweat today, shortly after which he could move one of his legs and thyes and work his toes pretty well, the other leg he can move a little; his fingers and arms seem to be almost entirely restored.    he seems highly delighted with his recovery. I begin to entertain strong hope of his restoration by these sweats.    in the evening Joseph Feild returned in surch of his horses which had left them last evening and returned to camp. Feilds informed us that himself and his brother whom he had left at their camp 6 ms. distant on Collin's creek, had killed 3 deer. The reptiles which I have observed in this quarter are the Rattlesnake of the speceis discribed on the Missouri, they are abundant in every part of the country and are the only poisonous snake which we have yet met with since we left St. Louis.    the 2 speceis of snakes of an inosent kind already discribed.    the common black lizzard, the horned lizzard, a smal green tree frog, the smal frog which is common to our country which sings in the spring of the year, a large speceis of frog which resorts the water considerably larger than our bull frog, it's shape seems to be a medium between the delicate and lengthy form of our bull frog and that of our land frog or toad as they are sometimes called in the U' States.    like the latter their bodies are covered with little pustles or lumps, elivated above the ordinary surface of the body; I never heard them make any sound or nois.    the mockerson snake or coperhead, a number of vipers a variety of lizzards, the toad bullfrog &c common to the U' States are not to be found in this country.    most of the insects common to the U' States are found here.    the butterflies, common house and blowing flies, the horse flies, except the goald coloured ear fly, tho' in stead of this fly we have a brown coloured fly about the same size which attatches itself to that part of the horse and is equally as troublesome.    the silkworm is also found here.    a great variety of beatles common to the Atlantic states are found here likewise.    except from this order the large cow beatle and the black beatle usually alled the tumble bug which are not found here.    the hornet, the wasp and yellow wasp or yellow jacket as they are frequently called are not met with in this quarter.    there is an insect which much resembles the latter only a vast deel larger which are very numerous particularly in the rocky mountains on the waters of the Columbia; these build in the ground where they form a nest like the hornet with an outer covering to the comb in which they deposit their eggs and raise their young.    the sheets of this comb are attatched to each other as those of the hornets are.    their wings are four of a dark brown colour.    the head is black, the body and abdomen are yellow incircled with transverse rings of black, they are ferce and sting very severely, we found them troublesome in fri[gh]tening our horses as we passed those mountains.    the honey bee is not found here.    the bumble bee is.    one of the men brought me today some onions from the high plain of a different speceis from those near the borders of the river as they are also from the shive or small onion noticed below the falls of the Columbia.    these onions were as large as a nutmeg, they generally grow double or two bulbs connected by the same tissue of radicles; each bulb has two long liniar flat solid leaves.    the peduncle is solid celindric and crowned with an umbal of from 20 to 30 flowers.    this onion is exceedingly crisp and delicately flavoured indeed I think more sweet and less strong than any I ever taisted.    it is not yet perfectly in blow, the parts of the flower are not distinct.—
ClarkFriday May 30th 1806.Lapage and Shabono Set out early this morning to the Indian Village in order to trade with them for roots; Serjt. Gass was Sent this morning to obtain Some goats hair to Stuf the pads of our Saddles; he assended the river on this Side and being unable to pass the river to the village he wished to visit returned in the evening unsucksessfull. Shannon and Collins were permited to pass the river in order to trade with the nativs and lay in a Store of roots and bread for themselves with their proportion of the merchandize as others had done; on landing on the opposit Shore the Canoe was driven broad Side with the full force of a very Strong Current against Some Standing trees and instantly filled with water and Sunk. Potts who was with them is an indifferent Swimer, it was with dificuelty he made the land.    they lost three blankets and a Blanket Cappo and their pittance of Merchindize.    in our bear State of Clothing this was a Serious loss. I Sent Serjt. Pryor and a party over in the Indian Canoe in order to raise and Secure ours but the debth of the water and the Strength of the Current baffled every effort. I fear that we have also lost our Canoe.— all our involedes are on the recovery.    we gave the Sick Chief a Severe Swet to day, Shortly after which he could move one of his legs and thy's and work his toes pritty well, the other leg he can move a little; his fingers and arms Seem to be almost entirely restored.    he Seems highly delighted with his recovery. I begin to entertain Strong hope of his recovering by these Sweats.—.
in the evening Joseph Fields returned in serch of his horses which had left them last evening and returned to Camp. Field informed us that himself and his brother whome he had left at their Camp 6 ms. distant on Collins Creek had killed 3 Deer.—    The reptiles which I have observed in this quarter are the Rattle Snake of the Species discribed on the Missouri, they are abundant in every part of the Country and are the only poisonous Snake which we have met with Since we left St. Louis.    the Second Species of Snake of an inosent kind already discribd.    the Common black Lizzard, the horned Lizzard, a small green tree-frog; the Same frog which is common to our Country which Sings in the Spring of the year.    a large Species of frog which resorts the water considerably larger than our bull-frog, it's Shape Seems to be a Medium between the delicate and lengthy form of our bullfrogs and that of our land frog or toad as they are Sometimes called in the United States.    like the latter their bodies are covered with little pustles or lumps, elevated above the ordinary Surface of the body; I never heard them make any Sound or noise, the Mockerson Snake or Copper head, a number of vipers, a variety of Lizzards, the toad bullfrog &c. common to the U. States are not to be found in this Country. Most of the insects common to the U States are found here.    the butterfly, common house and blowing flies, the horse flies, except the gold coloured ear fly.    tho' in Stead of this fly we have a brown coloured fly about the same Size which attatches itself to that part of the horse and is equally as troublesom.    the Silk worm is also found here.    a great variety of beatles common to the atlantic States are Seen here likewise.    except from this order the large Cow beatle and the black beatle usially termed tumble bug which are not found here.    the hornet, the Wasp and yellow Wasp or yellow jacket as they are frequently Called are not met with in this quarter.    there is an insect which much resembles the latter only a vast deel larger which are very noumerous particular in the Rocky mountains on the waters of the Columbia, those build in the ground where they form a nest like the hornet with an outer covering to the Comb in which they deposit their eggs and raise their young. the Sheets of this Comb are attatched to each other as those of the hornets are.    their wings are four of a dark brown Colour—.    the head is black, the body and abdomin are yellow insercled with transverce rings of black, they are firce and Sting very Severely; we found them troublesom in frightening our horses as we passed through mountains.    the honey bee is not found here.    the bumble bee is.    one of the men brought me to day Some Onions from the high plains of a different Species from those near the borders of the river as they are also from the Shive or Small Onion noticed below the Falls of Columbia.    these Onions were as large as an nutmeg, they generally grow double or two bulbs connected by the same tissue of radicles; each bulb has two long liner flat solid leaves.    the pedencle is solid celindric and cround with an umble of from 20 to 30 flowers.    this Onion is exceedingly crisp and delicately flavoured indeed. I think more Sweet and less strong than any I ever tasted, it is not yet perfectly in blume, the parts of the flower are not distinct.—.

Ordway
Friday 30th May 1806.    a number of [Indians?] left this eairly with nearly all the Salmon which was caught so we had to wait here to day expecting to git some Salmon    the natives roasted an other Salmon & Set before us to eat.    in the afternoon we purchased as many Salmon as we thought was necessary to take home and hung them up    the most they catch is on the opposite shore along the rocks in the whorls & eddys.    we Saw only three dip nets at 3 places a fishing.

GassFriday 30th.    The morning was fine, with a little fog. Two of our men in a canoe attempting to swim their horses over the river, struck the canoe 
against a tree, and she immediately sunk; but they got on shore, with the loss of three blankets, a blanket-coat, and some articles of merchandize they had with them to exchange for roots. The loss of these blankets is the greatest which hath happened to any individuals since we began our voyage, as there are only three men in the party, who have more than a blanket a piece. The river is so high that the trees stand some distance in the water. In the afternoon one of our hunters came in, who with another had killed three deer, 
which one of them stayed to take care of as their horses had left them.




Probably the western fence lizard again. A red vertical line begins at "The reptiles which" and runs to "a large speceis," perhaps penned by Biddle.Pacific tree frog, a new species. Cutright (LCPN), 306, 428; Benson (HLCE), 88.Probably the chorus frog, Pseudacris triseriata. Benson (HLCE), 88.The western toad (not a frog,) Bufo boreas, a new species. Cutright (LCPN), 306, 427; Benson (HLCE), 87–88. The bullfrog mentioned may be the green frog, Rana clamitans, and the toad may be either the American toad, Bufo americanus, or Fowler's toad, B. woodhousii.Copperhead, Agkistrodon contortrix.The horse flies are from the Tabanidae family; the ear fly may be the greenhead, Tabanus sp.; and the brown fly is probably the deer fly, Chrysops sp.Possibly the tent caterpillar, Malacosoma disstria.Tumble bug (actually a beetle of the family Scarabaeidae) refers to the practice of the species of rolling small pieces of dung along the ground. It is also called the dung beetle.The hornet and wasp are Dolichovespula sp., and/or Polistes sp., and the yellow jacket is Vespula maculifrons.This may be the western yellow jacket, Vespula pensylvanica, although other possibilities exist.The honey bee is Apis mellifera, while the bumble bee is Bombus sp.The onion of the high plains is either Tolmie's onion, Allium tolmiei Baker ex Wats, or Douglas's onion, A. douglasii Hook. The onion "near the borders of the river" would be Geyer's onion, while the "shive or small onion" is the wild chive, both noted earlier. Hitchcock et al., 1:757–58, 747, 749; Cutright (LCPN), 306, 401.Shannon and Collins, but Potts seems to have been with them at the time of the 
accident.Joseph Field came in, while his brother Reubin stayed with the deer.