May 18, 1805LewisSaturday May 18th 1805.
The wind blew hard this morning from the West.    we were enabled to employ our toe line the greater part of the day and therefore proceeded on tolerably well.    there are now but few sandbars, the river is narrow and current gentle.    the timber consists of a few cottonwood trees along the verge of the river; the willow has in a great measure disappeared.    in the latter part of the day the hills widened, the bottoms became larger, and contained more timber.    we passed a creek [EC: Wisers] on the Stard. side about three oclock, which afforded no water; came too and encamped on the Lard. side opposite to the lower point of a small Island, two miles short of the extremity of the last course of this day.    Capt Clark in the course of his walk this evening killed four deer, two of which were the black tailed or mule deer; the skins are now good, they have not yet produced their young.—    we saw a number of buffaloe, Elk, deer and Antelopes.—    the saline substance frequently mentioned continues to appear as usual.— Courses and distances 18th of May.MilesS. 66° W.to a point of wood on the Stard. side, opposite	to a high
irregular hill on Lard. side     ¾N. 80 W.along the Stard. side oposite a bluff     ½N. 45 W.to a clump of trees of a Lard. point, opposite a high rugged
bluff  1 ½S. 80 W.to a point of timber on the Lard. side  1 ½S. 60 W.to a point of timber on the Stard side oposite a bluff     ½S. 85° W.to a point on Lard. side  2S. 60 W.along the Lard. shore     ½South	to a point of woodland on the Stard side oposite a bluff  1 ¼S. 45 W.along the Stard. point, to the extremity of a sandbar, opo-
site a bluff.     ½N. 20 W.to a point of woodland on the Lard. side the river making
a deep bend to the N.  2N. 55 W.to a large tree in the center of a Stard bend  1S. 70 W.to the point of a sandbar on the Lard. side, passing the
entrance of a Creek [EC: Wisers] on Stard. at ½ a mile  1 ¼S. 20 W.to a point of woodland on the Stard side  1 ½S. 35 W.along the Stard. side opposite a bluff     ½N. 85 W.to a point of woodland Lard. side the river making a deep
bend to N. under a bluff  2 ¼S. 60 W.along the Lard. point     ½S. 5 W.to a timbered point on Stard side passing a small Island, ¾
of a mile in length, commencing at 1 mile    opposite to the
lower	point of this island on the Lard. side we	encamped  3    Miles21ClarkMay 18th Satturday 1805						   
A windey morning wind from the West    we proceeded on verry well with the assistance of the Toe Coard, river narrow but fiew Sand bars, & current jentle, but a few Cotton Trees Contained in the bottoms    willow is not common on the bears [bars] as usial    Some little on the Sides of the river is yet to be Seen, the after part of the day was Cloudy & at about 12 oClock it began to rain and continued moderately for about 1½ hours, not Sufficient to wet a man thro' his clothes; this is the first rain Since we Set out this Spring    The hills widen and the bottoms Contain more timber than for Several days past, we passed a Wisers Creek on the Std. Side about 3 oClock and Camped on the Lard Side opposit the lower point of a handsom little Island near the middle of the river. I walked on Shore and killed four Deer, 2 common & 2 mule deer, one of which had 3 fauns, 2 others had 2 each, those deer are fat, & their Skins tolerable good, which are now in demand with us for clothes Such as Legins & Mockersons, I Saw great numbers of Buffalows & Elk; Some of the party Shoot & Catch beaver every day & night miles   Course & Distance 18th of MayS. 66° W.     ¾to a point of wood on the Stard. Side opposit a high un-
eavin hill L. S.N. 80° W.     ½allong the Stard. Side opposit a bluffN. 45° W.  1 ½to a fiew trees on a point on the Lard. Side opposit a rug-
ged bluffS. 80° W.  1 ½to a point of timber on the Lard. SideS. 60° W.     ½to a point of timber on the Stard Side oppised to a Bluff
on the L. S.S. 85° W.  2to a point on the Lard SideS. 60° W     ½allong the Lard ShoreSouth  1 ¼to a point of wood land on the Std. Side opposit a BluffS. 45° W.     ½allong the Stard point to the extremity of a Sand bar, oppo-
sit a low bluffN. 20° W.  2to a point of wood land on the Lard Side the river make-
ing a deep bend to the NorthN. 55° W.  1to a large tree in the Center of the bend on the Stard. SideS. 70° W.  1 ¼to the point of a Sand bar on the Lard Side passing the
enterence of a Wisers Creek on S. S. at ½ mS. 20° W  1 ½to a point of wood land on the Stard. SideS. 35° W.     ½allong the Stard. point opposit a bluff L. S.N. 85 W  2 ¼to a point of wood land <Stard> Lard Side the river make-
ing a deep bend to the N. under. a bluffS. 60° W.     ½allong the Lard point.S. 5° W.  3   to a timbered point on the Stard Side, pass a Small Island
of a mile in length, comeng. at 1 mile.    opposit to the
lower point of this Island on the Lard Side we Campedmiles21 OrdwaySaturday 18th May 1805.    a clear warm morning.    one of the party caught a beaver last night.    another killed a rattle Snake this morning    at 7 oClock Set off and proceeded on    passed verry high rough hills, which look mountainous and make in to the River on each Side.    the bottoms verry narrow, but little timber only Spots of pitch pine on Sd hills.    the bottoms are generally covered with rose bushes & Rabbit berry bushes    [two lines illegible] to dine at a large bottom covered with timber on N. S. which was filled with buffaloe Elk deer &.c. Capt. Clark killed a fat deer.    one of the party killed 2 Elk. another killed a beaver    about one oC. P. M. cleared up pleasant, about 2 we proceeded on    passed pitch pine hills on each Side of the River    about 3 oC. we passed a large Creek on N. S. & a large timbered bottom on the S. S.    the Missourie is gitting clear and gravelly bottom, & Shore    we passed no falling in banks as we did below these pitch pine hilly country.    a pleasant warm afternoon. Capt Clark killed three Deer.    we came 19 miles to day and Camped in a Smooth bottom thinly covered with c. w. timber on the South Side.


GassSaturday 18th.    A cloudy morning. We proceeded as usual. The country much the same as yesterday; until about 12 o'clock, when the bottoms became more extensive on both sides of the river. There is still a small quantity of pine timber on the hills. We had some showers of rain in the forenoon; hail in the afternoon; and a fine clear evening. We went nineteen miles and encamped on the South side opposite an island.

WhitehouseSaturday 18th May 1805.    a clear warm morning.    one of the party killed a rattle Snake.    another caught a beaver.    about 7 oC. we Set out and proceeded on.    passed Some narrow bottoms of timber & covered with rose bushes.    about 10 oC. clouded up and began to rain.    we had Several Small Showers.    about 12 oC Capt. Clark killed a fat deer.    we halted to dine and dry our Selves at a large bottom covered with timber on N. S.    this bottom is filled with buffaloe Elk Deer &c    one of the party killed 2 Elk.    another killed a beaver.    about 2 we proceeded on    the weather cleared up and we had a pleasant afternoon    the River water is gitting clear and gravelly 
bottom &c.    we came 19 miles and Camped at a Smooth high bottom on S. S.    N. B. (Capt. Clark killed three deer)
Saturday May 18th    We had a fine warm morning, One of our party killed a rattle Snake of a large size and another caught a beaver, About 7 o'Clock we set out, and passed some narrow bottoms of timber, <and> covered with Rosebushes.—    At 10 oClock A. M. it clouded up and began to rain; and we had small Showers.    at 12 o'Clock A. M. Captain Clark went on shore, and killed a fat deer, We then halted to dine and to dry our Cloathes, at a large bottom covered with timber lying on the North side of the River.    This bottom is filled with buffalo, elk, deer & other game, Two of our party killed 2 Elk and One beaver, About 2 o'Clock P. M We proceeded on our way, and 
the weather cleared up, and we had a pleasant afternoon, Here the Water of the Mesouri River, that had been muddy ever since we first entered it, began to get clear, and the bottom that was mud, is gravelly—    Captain Clark who had been out a hunting joind us in the Evening; having killed 3 deer, which we took on board the Crafts, We encamped that Evening on a high smooth bottom, lying on the South side of the River, having come 19 Miles this day



Fourchette Creek, in Phillips County, Montana. Atlas maps 38, 50, 59; MRC map 68.In Garfield County, Montana, about two miles upstream from the present Devils Creek Recreation Area. The small island opposite the camp, Kid Island on Atlas maps 38, 50, 59, may be the later Elk Island. The area is now under the Fort Peck Reservoir. MRC map 68.Also given on Atlas map 38, in both captains' hands.The correction to "Lard" appears to be in Lewis's hand.Prairie rattlesnake, Crotalus viridus viridus, described by Lewis on May 17.Unknown rose, Rosa sp.Whitehouse has the following for these missing lines, "about 10 oC. clouded up and began to rain.    about 12 oC Capt. Clark killed a fat deer.    we halted to dine. . . ."Above these letters, in the top right-hand corner of the page, is the word, "May."Wiser's Creek to the captains, after Peter Weiser of the party, now Fourchette Creek, Phillips County, Montana.