March 9, 1806LewisSunday March 9th 1806.
This morning the men set out at daylight to go in qust of the Elk which Collins had killed, they returned with it at eleven A. M. Bratton complains of his back being very painfull to him today; I conceive this pain to be something of the rheumatism.    we still apply the linniment and flannel; in the evening he was much better. Drewyer and Joseph Fields returned not having found any Elk. Sergt. Pryor and the fishing party not yet arrived, suppose they are detained by the winds.    visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a dog some fish and a Sea Otter skin for sale.    we suffered them to remain all night.    we set Shields at work to make some sacks of Elk skin to contain various articles. The large Swan is precisely the same common to the Atlantic States.    the small swan differs only from the larger one in size and it's note.    it is about one fouruth less and it's note entirely different.    the latter cannot be justly immetated by the sound of letters nor do I know any sounds with which a comparison would be pertinent.    it begins with a kind of whistleing sound and terminates in a round full note which is as loud as that of the large swan.    from the peculiar whistleing of the note of this bird I have called it the whistleing swan    it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely those of the large Swan.    we first saw them below the great narrows of the Columbia near the Chilluckkittequaw nation. They are very abundant in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter.    in number they are fully five for one of the large speceis. The duckinmallard or common large duck wich resembles the domestic duck are the same here with those of the U' Sts.    they are abundant and are found on every part of the river below the mountains.    they remain here all winter but I believe they do not continue during winter far above tidewater.    a beautifull duck and one of the most delicious in the world is found in considerable quantities in this neighbourhood during the Autumn and winter.    this is the same with that known in the Delliware, Susquehannah, and Potomac by the name of the Canvisback and in James River by that of shell-Drake; in the latter river; however I am informed that they have latterly almost entirely disappeared.    to the epicure of those parts of the union where this duck abounds nothing need be added in praise of the exqusite flavor of this duck. I have frequently eaten of them in several parts of the Union and I think those of the Columbia equally as delicious.    this duck is never found above tide-water; we did not meet with them untill after we reached the marshey Islands; and I beleive that they have already left this neighbourhood, but whether they have gone northwardly or Southwardly I am unable to determin; nor do I know in what part of the Continent they raise their young.— The read headed fishing duck is common to every part of the river and are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as elsewhere; in short this was the only duck we saw on the waters of the Columbia within the mountains.    they feed principally on crawfish and are the same in every rispect as those on the rivers in the mountains of the Atlantic.—
ClarkSunday Mach 9th 1806
This morning the men Set out at day light to go in quest of the Elk which Collins had killed, they returned at 11 A. M Bratten complains of his backs being very painfull to him to day.    we Still apply the linnement & flannel; in the evening he was much better. Jos: Field & Drewyer returned not haveing found any Elk. Sergt. Pryor and the fishing party not yet returned, Suppose they are detained by the winds.    we are visited by 3 Clatsop men who brought a Dog, Some fish and a Sea otter Skin for Sale.    we Suffered them to remain all night.    we Set Shields at work to make Some Sacks of Elk Skin to contain my papers, and various articles which we wish kept Dry.
The large Swan is precisely the Same Common to the Missouri, Mississippi and the Atlantic States &c. The Small Swan differ only from the large one in Size and it's note.    it is about ¼th less, and its notes entirely diferent.    the latter cannot be justly immetated by the Sound of letters nor do I know any Sound with which a comparison would be pertinent.    it begins with a kind of whistling Sound and terminates in a round full note which is reather louder than the whistling, or former part; this note is as loud as that of the large Swan.    from the peculiar whistling of the note of this bird I have Called it the Whistleing Swan.    it's habits colour and contour appear to be precisely those of the large swan.    we first saw them below the great narrows of the Columbia near the Chilluck-kittequaw Nation.    they are very abundant in this neighbourhood and have remained with us all winter.    in number they are fully five for one of the large Species of the Swan's.
The Duckinmallard are the Same here with those of the U, States. they are abundant and are found on every part of the river below the mountains.    they remain here all winter, but I believe they do not remain all winter above tide water.—    a butifull Duck and one of the most delicious in the world is found in Considerable quantities in this neighbourhood dureing the Autumn and winter.    this is the Same as that known in the Dilliwar, Susquehannah and Potomac by the name of the Canvisback and James River by that of Shell-Drake; in the latter river I am informed that they have latterly almost entirely disapeared.    the epicures of those parts of the Union where those Ducks abound nothing need be added in prais of the exquisit flavor of this duck. I have eaten of them in Several parts of the Union and I think those of the Columbia equally as delicious.    this duck is never found above tide water; we did not meat with them untill after we reached the marshey Islands; and I believe that they have already left this neighbourhood; but whether they are gorn Northerly or Southerly, I am unable to deturmine; nor do I know in what part of the Country they rais their young.—.
The red headed fishing duck is common to every part of the river and are found as well in the Rocky Mountains as elsewhere; in short this was the only duck we Saw within the Mountain on the Columbian waters. they feed principally on Crawfish; and are the Same in every respects as those on the Ohio and rivers in the mountains of the atlantic Ocian.
The black and white Duck are Small about the Size of the blue-winged teal, or reather larger.    the mail is butifully varigated with black and white.    the white occupies the Side of the head, breast and back.    black the tail, large feathers of the wing, two tufts of feathers which cover the upper part of the wings when folded, the neck and head.    the female is darker or has much less white about her. I take this to be the Same Species of duck common to the ohio, as also the atlantic Coast, and Sometimes called the butter box.    the back is wide and Short, and as well as the legs of a dark Colour.    the flesh of this duck is verry well flavored I think Superior to the Duckinmallard.

Ordway
Sunday 9th March 1806.    a little [snow?] & hail this morning and cold. I and 10 more of the party went and brought in the meat of the 2 Elk. Shortly after we returnd Several of the Clatsop Indians came to the Fort with Some Small fish and a little bears wax to trade to us.    we bought a fiew &C.
GassSunday 9th.    This morning 10 men went out to hunt. There were some light showers of snow this forenoon, but during the greater part of it, the sun shone clear and warm. In the afternoon some of the natives came to visit us, and brought some of the small fish, which they call Ulken. Two hunters came in in the evening, but had not killed any thing. The men sent to fish are still absent, owing perhaps to the high swells in the bay. The Indians remained in the fort all night.


Whitehouse
Monday March 10th    We had Showers of rain, with Snow and hail.    several of our Men went out a hunting.    the wind blew hard this day.    Our party are engaged at the fort in repairing the Canoes & dressing of Skins &ca.


The trumpeter swan. A red vertical line runs through this material about swans, perhaps done by Biddle.The tundra, or whistling, swan.Marsh Island, and others in Cathlamet Bay, Clatsop County, Oregon. Atlas maps 81, 82.A variety of Astacus, crayfish.The bufflehead.Ordway says that the ten went out under his leadership to bring in the meat of elk 
already killed.The captains wrote it "ol-then," a Chinookan term, ú-łx̣an, for dried eulachon; see Lewis's entry of March 25.Drouillard and Joseph Field, say the captains.Under Pryor.According to the captains, two parties hunted along the Lewis and Clark River, and another, consisting of Drouillard, Reubin Field, and Frazer, went beyond Youngs River. See the captain's entries for March 10 and 11.