July 1, 1805LewisMonday July 1st 1805.
This morning I set Frazier and Whitehouse to sewing the leather on the sides of the sections of the boat; Shields and J. Fields to collect and split light wood and prepare a pit to make tar. Gas I set at work to make the way strips out of some willow limbs which tho' indifferent were the best which could be obtained. Drewyer and myself completed the opperation of rendering the tallow; we obtained about 100 lbs.    by evening the skins were all attatched to their sections and I returned them again to the water.    all matters were now in readiness to commence the opperation of puting the parts of the boat together in the morning.    the way strips are not yet ready but will be done in time as I have obtained the necessary timber.    the difficulty in obtaining the necessary materials has retarded my operations in forming this boat extreemly tedious and troublesome; and as it was a novel peice of machinism to all who were employed my constant attention was necessary to every part of the work; this together with the duties of cheif cook has kept me pretty well employed.    at 3 P. M. Capt. Clark arrived with the party all very much fortiegued.    he brought with him all the baggage except what he had deposited yesterday at the six mile stake, for which the party were too much fortiegued to return this evening.    we gave them a dram and suffered them to rest from their labours this evening. I directed Bratton to assist in making the tar tomorrow, and scelected several others to assist in puting the boat together.    the day has been warm and the Musquetoes troublesome of course    the bear were about our camp all last night, we have therefore determined to beat up their quarters tomorrow, and kill them or drive them from their haunts about this place. ClarkWhite Bear Islands above the Falls of the Missouri July 1st Monday 1805I arrived at this place to day at 3 oClock P. M. with the party from the lower part of the portage much fatigued &c.ClarkJuly 1st Monday 1805.
We Set out early this morning with the remaining load, and proceeded on verry well to Capt Lewis's Camp where we arrived at 3 oClock, the Day worm and party much fatigued, found Capt. Lewis and party all buisey employd in fitting up the Iron boat, the wind hard from the S, W,—    one man verry unwell, his legs & theis broke out and Swelled    the hail which fell at Capt. Lewis Camp 27 Ins was 7 Inches in circumfrance & waied 3 ounces, fortunately for us it was not So large in the plains, if it had we Should most certainly fallen victims to its rage as the men were mostly naked, and but few with hats or any covering on their heads, The hunters killed 3 white bear one large, the fore feet of which measured 9 Inchs across, the hind feet 11 Inchs ¾ long & 7 Inch's wide    a bear nearly Catching Joseph Fields Chased him into the water, bear about the Camp every night & Seen on an Isld. in the dayOrdwayJuly 1st Monday 1805.    we Set out eairly this morning with the remaining loads and proceeded on verry well to Capt. Lewiss Camp where we arived at 3 oClock    the day warm and party much fatigued    found Capt. Lewis and party all employed in fitting the Iron boat &C the wind hard from the S. W.    one man verry unwell. his legs & thighs broke out and Swelled. the hail which fell at Capt. Lewis Camp was 7 Inches in Surcunference and weighed 3 ounces. fortinately for us it was not so large in the plains where we was    if it had we Should most certainly fallen victims to its rage as the most of the men were without hats or any thing on their heads and mostly naked. the hunters at the upper Camp killed 3 White bear one large the fore feet of which measured 9 Inches across.    the head [hind] feet 11¼ Inches long and 7 Inches wide.    a bear nearly catching Joseph Fields chased him in to the water.    bear about the Camp everry night, and Seen on the Island in the day.


GassMonday 1st July, 1805.    A fine day. In the afternoon, Captain Clarke and the men came with all the baggage except some they had left six miles back. The hail that fell on the 27th hurt some of the men very badly. Captain Clarke, the interpreter, and the squaw and child, had gone to see the spring at the falls; and when the storm began, they took shelter under a bank at the mouth of a run; but in five minutes there was seven feet water in the run; and they were very near being swept away. They lost a gun, an umbrella and a Surveyor's compass, and barely escaped with their lives.WhitehouseJuly 1st Monday 1805.    pleasant and warm.    we continued on with the Iron boat as usal.    about 3 oClock Capt. Clark and party arived with the last canoe and the most of the baggage.    the remainder left only out at the 6 mile Stake.    they informed us that the wet weather was what detained them and that they were out in the hail Storm but as luck would have it, the hail was not So big as they were here.    Capt. Clark was at the falls at the time had hunted a Shelter in a deep creek with out water when he went in but before the Shower was over the creek rose So fast that he and 3 more who were with him had Scarsely time to git out before the water was ten feet deep.    Capt. Clark lost the large Compass a fusiee pouch & horn powder & ball, and Some cloaths &c.    the party who were halling Some of them like to have lost their lives, being nearly naked and the most of them without any hats on their heads or anything to cover them and under went as much as any men could and live through it.
Monday July 1st    This morning pleasant and warm; the party at the upper Camp were all employ'd in fitting out the Iron boat as usual.—    About 3 o'Clock P. M Captain Clarke & his party arrived, with the last of our Craft, and part of the baggage, the remainder being left, at the 6 mile stake, they informed us that they were detained by the wet weather, and that they had been out in the hailstorm, but that the hall was not so large, as that, which fell with us at the upper camp; Captain Clarke was at the falls of the River, at the time the hail fell, and had hunted a shelter for himself, & party from the Rain & hail.—    This sheltering place, was in a deep Creek, without any Water in it, at the time it first began raining; & he mentioned that before the shower was over; the Creek rose so fast, that he and those with him, had scarcely time to get out, before the Water was ten feet deep in that Creek—    Captain Clarke had lost at that place, a large compass, a fusee, pouch & powder horn, powder, & Ball and some Cloathing &ca    The party that was hawling the Crafts, had nearly all lost their lives, being nearly naked, and the most part of them without hats, <on their heads,> or any thing to cover them, They had no shelter & were Cut and bruised very much by the hail, and under went, as much as Men could possibly endure; to escape with their lives.—

Clark's Codex G (July 1–October 10, 1805) has brief entries for July 1, 2, and 3, 1805, overlapping the longer ones for those dates in his Voorhis No. 1. It is likely that the Codex G entries were the first ones, as they are placed here."Twenty-seventh instant," referring to June 27, 1805; "ultimo," rather than "instant," would be the correct form for referring to the previous month.See Clark's account of this incident in his entry of June 29. York was also with this group.