July 2, 1806LewisWednesday July 2ed 1806.
We sent out the hunters early this morning, they returned not so successfull as yesterday having killed 2 deer only. Sheilds continued repairing the gunns which he compleated by evening.    all arrangements being now compleat we determined to set out in the morning.    in the course of the day we had much conversation with the indians by signs, our only mode of communicating our ideas.    they informed us that they wished to go in surch of the Ootslashshoots their friends and intended leaving us tomorrow morning, I prevailed on them to go with me as far as the East branch of Clark's River and put me on the road to the Missouri. I gave the Cheif a medal of the small size; he insisted on exchanging names with me according to their custom which was accordingly done and I was called Yo-me-kol-lick which interpreted is the white bearskin foalded.    in the evening the indians run their horses, and we had several foot races betwen the natives and our party with various success.    these are a race of hardy strong athletic active men.    nothin worthy of notice transpired in the course of the day. Goodrich and McNeal are both very unwell with the pox which they contracted last winter with the Chinnook women this forms my inducement principally for taking them to the falls of the Missouri where during an intervail of rest they can use the murcury freely. I found two speceis of native clover here, the one with a very narrow small leaf and a pale red flower, the other nearly as luxouriant as our red clover with a white flower the left and blume of the latter are proportionably large. I found several other uncommon plants specemines of which I preserved. The leaf of the cottonwood on this river is like that common to the Columbia narrower than that common to the lower part of the Missouri and Mississippi and wider than that on the upper part of the Missouri.    the wild rose, servise berry, white berryed honeysuckle, seven bark, elder, alder aspin, chock cherry and the broad and narrow leafed willow are natives of this valley.    the long leafed pine forms the principal timber of the neighbourhood, and grows as well in the river bottoms as on the hills.    the firs and larch are confined to the higher parts of the hills and mountains.    the tops of the high mountains on either side of this river are covered with snow.    the musquetoes have been excessively troublesome to us since our arrival at this place.
ClarkWednesday July 2nd 1806
Sent out 2 hunters this morning and they killed 2 Deer.    the Musquetors has been So troublesom day and night Since our arrival in this Vally that we are tormented very much by them and Cant' write except under our Bears. We gave the Second gun to our guides aggreable to our promis, and to each we gave Powder & ball    I had the greater part of the meat dried for to Subsist my party in the Mountains between the head of Jeffersons & Clarks rivers where I do not expect to find any game to kill.    had all of our arms put in the most prime order    two of the rifles have unfortunately bursted near the muscle, Shields Cut them off and they Shute tolerable well    one which is very Short we exchanged with the Indian whoe we had given a longer gun to induc them to pilot us across the Mountains.    we caused every man to fill his horn with powder & have a sufficincy of Balls &c.    the last day in passing down Travellers rest CreekCapt Lewis fell down the Side of a Steep Mountain near 40 feet but fortunately receved no dammage.    his hors was near falling on him but fortunately recovered and they both escaped unhurt. I killed a Small grey squurel and a Common pheasant. Capt L. Showed me a plant in blume which is Sometimes called the ladies Slipper or Mockerson flower.    it is in shape and appearance like ours only that the corolla is white marked with Small veigns of pale red longitudinally on the inner Side, and much Smaller. The Indians and Some of our men amused themselves in running races on foot as well as with their horses.

Ordway
Wednesday 2nd July 1806.    a clear pleasant morning. Several men went out a hunting.    about 10 A. M. Collins Came in    had killed one deer. Capt. Lewis Called for 6 vollunteers to go with him on a route up the River Marriah as he intends going that way    they immediately tourned out    our guides wished to leave us here but Capt. Lewis prievailed with them to go 2 days march with him and put him on the road to the falls of the Missouri then they intend to return to their nation.    2 Invalleeds is going to the falls to Stay their untill the party comes down with the canoes, and one man to make geers for the 4 horses which is to be left their to draw the canoes past the portage.—

GassWednesday 2nd.    We continued here during this day, which was fine and pleasant, fixing our loading and making other arrangements for our separation. One of the hunters went out and killed two deer.— The musquitoes are very troublesome at this place.



The Clark Fork, or Hellgate, River, meeting the Bitterroot west of present Missoula, in Missoula County, Montana.The smaller species is small-head, or wooly, clover, Trifolium microcephalum Pursh. Lewis had on the previous day collected a specimen that was used by Pursh to describe the new species. The larger clover is largehead clover, T. macrocephalum (Pursh) Poiret. Hitchcock et al., 3:366; Cutright (LCPN), 421. Red clover used for comparison is T. pratense L. It was probably Biddle who marked the red vertical line through these botanical passages.Lewis preserved specimens of at least four undescribed species at Travelers' Rest. The most notable was a small herb with a very large flower, recognized by Pursh as a representative of a new genus, and fittingly named Lewisia.Lewis's genus now consists of about twenty western North American species. The species discovered here is bitterroot, L. rediviva Pursh. The common name refers to its bitter-tasting roots, which were an important source of food and a major trade item for the native people. Lewis's initial description is at August 22, 1805. The other new species collected here were: thinlead owlclover, Orthocarpus tenuifolius (Pursh) Benth.; wormleaf stonecrop, Sedum stenopatelum Pursh; and the small-head clover mentioned in the previous note. Hitchcock et al., 2:235, 573, 4:354; Cutright (LCPN), 307–8, 410, 412, 419.Black cottonwood, Populus trichocarpa T. & G. It has narrower leaves than plains cottonwood, P. deltoides Marsh., and broader leaves than narrowleaf cottonwood, P. angustifolia James, both encountered earlier. Hitchcock et al., 34–37; Little (CIH), 153-W, 149-W; Little (MWH), 114.Common elderberry, Sambucus canadensis L.Quaking aspen, Populus tremuloides Michx., is observed among other common Rocky Mountain shrubs noted earlier. Hitchcock et al., 2:35.Many species of willow occur in the valley. The narrow-leaved species is sandbar, or coyote, willow, Salix exigua Nutt.; broad-leaved species include Bebb willow, S. bebbiana Sarg., Scouler willow, S. scouleriana Barratt, and yellow willow, S. lutea Nutt. Ibid., 2:51–52, 45–46, 66–67; Dorn, 227–28.Lewis notes a vegetation pattern similar to that observed on the western side of the Bitterroot Range. The ponderosa pine predominates in the hot and dry climate of the low-elevation valley bottom, while the other conifers gain dominance on cooler and moister mountain slopes.Lewis selected Drouillard, the Field brothers, Werner, Frazer, and Gass to explore the
Marias River with him. The destinations and divisions of the rest of the party are discussed in the entries of Lewis and Clark.Clark names three men (Thompson, Goodrich, and McNeal) who would accompany Lewis as far as the Great Falls of the Missouri River.Ordway reports Collins as having killed one deer.