April 13, 1806LewisSunday April 13th 1806.
The loss of one of our perogues rendered it necessary to distribute her crew and cargo among the 2 remaining perogues and 2 canoes, which being done we loaded and set out 8 A. M.    we passed the village immediately above the rapids where only one house at present remains entire, the other 8 having been taken down and removed to the oposite side of the river as before mentioned.    we found the additional laiding which we had been compelled to put on board rendered our vessels extreemly inconvenient to mannage and in short reather unsafe in the event of high winds; I therefore left Capt. C. with the two Perogues to proceede up the river on the N. side, and with the two canoes and some additional hands passed over the river above the rapids of the Y-eh-huh village in order to purchase one or more canoes. I found the village consisting of 11 houses crouded with inhabitants; it appeared to me that they could have mustered about 60 fighting men then present.    they appeared very friendly disposed, and I soon obtained two small canoes from them for which I gave two robes and four elkskins. I also purchased four paddles and three dogs from them with deerskins.    the dog now constitutes a considerable part of our subsistence and with most of the party has become a favorite food; certain I am that it is a healthy strong diet, and from habit it has become by no means disagreeable to me, I prefer it to lean venison or Elk, and is very far superior to the horse in any state.    after remaining about 2 hours at this Village I departed and continued my rout with the four canoes along the S. side of the river the wind being too high to pass over to the entrance of Cruzatts river where I expected to have overtaken Capt. C.    not seing the perogues on the opposite side I ascended the river untill one oclock or about 5 ms. above the entrance of Cruzat's river.    being convinced that the perogues were behind I halted and directed the men to dress the dogs and cook one of them for dinner; a little before we had completed our meal Capt. C. arrived with the perogues and landed opposite to us.    after dinner I passed the river to the perogues and found that Capt. C. had halted for the evening and was himself hunting with three of the party.    the men in formed me that they had seen nothing of the hunters whom we had sent on the 11th ints. to the Entrance of Cruzatt's Riv. I directed Sergt. ordway to take the two small canoes for his mess and the loading which he had formerly carried in the perogue we lost yesterday, and to have them dryed this evening and payed with rozin. Capt. Clark returned in about an hour and being convinced that the hunters were yet behind we dispatched Sergt. Pryor in surch of them with two men and an empty canoe to bring the meat they may have killed. John Sheilds returned a little after six P. M. with two deer which he had killed.    these were also of the blacktailed fallow deer; there appears to be no other speceis of deer in these mountains. Capt. C. informed me that the wind had detained him several hours a little above Cruzatt's river; that while detained here he sent out some men to hunt; one of them wounded two deer but got neither of them.    the wind having lulled in the evening and not seing anything of Drewyer and the Feildses he had proceeded on to this place where he intended waiting for me, and as he did not see my canoes when he landed had taken a hunt with some of the men as before mentioned.—
ClarkSunday April 13th 1806
The loss of one of our large Canoes rendered it necessary to divide the loading and men of that Canoe between the remaining four, which was done and we loaded and Set out at 8 oClock A. M.    passed the village imediately above the rapids, where only one house remains entire the other 8 haveing been taken down and moved to the opposit Side of the Columbia as already mentioned.    the additional men and baggage in each Canoe renders them Crouded and unsafe. Capt. Lewis with 2 of the Smallest Canoes of Sergt. Pryor & gibson and Crossed above the Rapids to the Village on the S E Side with a view to purchase a Canoe of the nativs if possible.    he took with him Some Cloth and a fiew Elk skins and Deer Skins. I with the two large Canoes proceeded on up the N. W. Side with the intention of gitting to the Encampment of our hunters who was derected to hunt in the bottom above Crusats River, and there wait the arrival of Capt. Lewis. I proceeded on to the bottom in which I expected to find the hunters but Could See nothing of them.    the wind rose and raised the wavs to Such a hight that I could not proceed any further.    we landed and I sent out Shields and Colter to hunt; Shields Shot two deer but Could get neither of them. I walkd. to Crusats river and up it ½ a mile    on my return to the party found that the wind had lulled and as we Could See nothing of our hunters. I deturmined to proceed on to the next bottom where I thought it probable they had halted    at ½ passed 2 P M Set out and proceeded on to the bottom 6 miles and halted    at the next bottom formed a Camp and Sent out all the hunters. I also walked out my self on the hills but saw nothing.    on my return found Capt. Lewis at Camp with two canoes which he had purchased at the Y-ep-huh village for two robes and four elkskins.    he also purchased 4 paddles and <fo> three Dogs from the nativs with deer Skins.    the dogs now constitutes a considerable part of our Subsistance & with most of the party has become a favourable food. Certain I am that is a helthy Strong diet, <and> derected Serjt. ordway to take the 2 Small Canoes purchased by Capt. Lewis for his mess and the loading he had in his Canoe which we lost yesterday, and drawed up and paid with rozin.
I was convinced that the hunters must have been up River Cruzatt. despatched Sergt. Pryor with 2 men in a Canoe, with directions to assend Crusats River and if he found the hunters to assist them in with the meat. Jo: Shields returned about Sunset with two deer which he had killed, those were of the Black tail fallow Deer.    <the> there appears to be no other Species of Deer in those mountains. We proceeded on 12 miles.Ordway
Sunday 13th of April 1806.    we loaded up our canoes took a light breakfast of a little dog meat and departed    Soon passed the village    only one house remaining covred in it which lives a number of the natives. Capt. Lewis and the Small canoes crossed over to the South Side to 2 villages little above the Shoote in order to purchace a canoe from the natives if possable.    the current Swift.    we proceeded on little above cruzattes River    the wind rose So high that obledged us to halt at this bottom where we expected to find our Hunters    2 men went out a hunting    the day proved fair    the wind cold and Snow laying low on the Mountains near the River.    the hunters soon came in had killd. nothing but a bald Eagle    we then proceed. on about 5 miles and halted again at a bottom on the N. Side    3 men went out a hunting. Sergt. Pryor & 2 men Sent back to cruzattes River to look again for the hunters    one of the hunters killed two Deer. Capt. Lewis & party overtook us had purchased two Small canoes the price of which was 2 Small peaces of blue cloath and two Elk hides, & bought three dogs also.    we dryed the 2 Small canoes by fire and pitched them &c.


GassSunday 13th.    There was a cloudy morning. Having divided the load of the lost canoe among the 4 that were left, we renewed our voyage and passed a large deserted village on the north side. Captain Lewis with the two small canoes, crossed to the south side, where there is a large village inhabited, to endeavour to purchase a small canoe or two, as we were very much crowded in the four we had. Capt. Clarke with the two large canoes continued on along the northern shore, till we passed Crusatte's river, when the wind rose so high we could not go on, so we halted and waited for Capt. Lewis. Two hunters went out about 3 hours, but killed nothing. By this time the wind fell and we went on 3 miles to a better harbour, where we halted on the north side of the river. Capt. Clarke and 3 men went out to hunt; and Capt. Lewis having come up and crossed over to us, we fixed our camp for the night. He got 2 canoes and 3 dogs from the inhabitants of the large village.— They are of the Wey-eh-hoo nation and have twelve lodges here. At dark Capt. Clarke and party returned, and had killed two deer.



The "Yehuh" village on Atlas map 79, in Skamania County, Washington. See October 30, 1805.Evidently on the south side of the Columbia, in Hood River County, Oregon, but not marked on Atlas map 78 and 79.Wind River, Skamania County. Atlas map 78. Clark explored the bottomland east of the mouth of Wind River. Archaeological investigations in this vicinity at Home Valley Park documented evidence of seasonal campsites occupied over the last several thousand years. Minor & Beckham.In Skamania County, south of Dog Mountain, the party's camp for the night; apparently between Collins Creek and Dog Creek, which are marked but not named on Atlas map 78.The number 12 was apparently written over 16.Lewis calls it the "Y-eh-huh village," but it is not shown on expedition maps in Hood
River County, Oregon.Shields and Colter, reports Clark.Where they camped in Skamania County, apparently between Collins and Dog creeks.