Weather, May 1806Lewis and Clark[Weather, May 1806]State of theKooskooskeeDays ofthe monthState ofthe Weatherat ☉ riseWind at☉riseState of theWeather at4 P.M.Wind at4 P.M.rasedorfallenFeetInc. &parts1stc. a. r.S. W.c.S. W.2df. a. c.N. E.fS W3rdc a h r & sS Wc a r h & sS. W.4thf a hS. W.c a r & hS W5thfS WfS W6thr a c & rN. E.f a rN E7thf. a. c.N EfS W8thfS WfS W9thfS Wf a cW.10thc a r & sS W.f a sS W11thf a rS Wf a cS W12thfEfS W13thfS WfS W14thfS WfS W15thfNf a cN. W16thcS Ec a rS Er  6   17thr a rS Ec a rS Er10 ¾18thc a rS EcS Er  2   19thr a rS. Ec a rS Ef  4   20thr a rN Wc a rS. Er.  2   21stc a rS Ef a cS Ef  1   22ndfS EfS Ef  2   23rdfN WfN W & S Ef.  1 ½24thfS EfN Wf  1   25thc a r & TN WfN Wr  9 ½26thf a rS EfN Wr  6   27thcS Er a f r T LS Er  6 ½28thc a r T LS Ec a f r T & LS Er11   29thc a r & TS Ec a rN Wr1  5   30thc a rS EfS Ef  6   31stc a fS EfS Er1  1   [Remarks]1sthad a pretty hard shower last night.    cold morning.—    having left the river we could no longer observe it's state; it is now de-
clining tho' it has not been as high this season by five feet as it
appears to have been the last spring.    the indians inform us that
it will rise higher in this month, which I presume is caused by the
snows of the mountains.2ndcold this morning, some dew.3rdrained last night and snowed & hailed this morning.    the air
cold and wind hard.    the mountains to our right seem to have
experienced an increase of their snow last evening.4thheavy white frost this morning    ice 1/6 of an inch thick on stand-
ing water.5thhard frost this morning    ice ⅛ of an inch thick on vessels of
water7ththe Kooskooske is rising    water cold and clear.9thMusquetors troublesom10thSnow was 8 inches deep this morning.    it began to rain and hail
about sunseting this evening which was shortly after succeeded
by snow.    it continued to fall without intermission untill 7 A. M.
and lay 8 inches deep on the plain where we were.    the air was
very keen.    a suddon transition this.    yesterday the face of the
country had every appearance of summer.    after nine A. M. the
sun shown but was frequently obscured by clouds which gave us
light showers of snow.    in the after part of the day the snow
melted considerably but there was too great a portion to be disi-
pated by the influence of one day's sun.11ththe Crimson haw is not more forward now at this place than it
was when we lay at rock fort camp in April.—12ththe natives inform us that the salmon have arrived at the en-
trance of the Kooskooske in great numbers and that some were
caught yesterday in Lewis's river opposite to us many miles above
the entrance of that river.    from this village of the broken arm
Lewis's river is only about 10 miles distant to the S. W.—    the
natives also inform us that the salmon appear <much> many
days sooner in Lewis's river above the entrance of the Kooskooske
than they do in that stream.13thformed a Camp on the Kooskooske15thThe Kooskoske rising fast, the water is clear and cold.16thlast night was uncommonly warm    river rising fast.    say 9 Inches17thrained hard the greater part of the night    wet the Chronometer
by accedent.    river rise 11 inches    the indians caught 3 salmon
at their village on the Kooskooskee above our camp some miles.
they say that these fish are now passing by us in great numbers
but that they cannot be caught as yet because those which first
ascend the river do not keep near shore; they further inform us
that in the course of a few days the fish run near the shore and
then they take them with their skimming neitts in great num-
bers.    rained untill 12 Ock. by intervails.—19thrained hard last night and untill 8 A M20thrained violently the greater part of the night.    air raw and
cold.    a nest of the large blue or sand hill crain was found by one
of our hunters.    the young were in the act of leaving the shell.
the young of the partycoloured corvus begin to fly.—21stthe air is remarkably dry and pure    it has much the feeling and
appearance of the air in the plains of the Missouri.22ndair colder this morning than usual    white frost tho' no ice.
since our arrival in this neighbourhood on the 7th inst. all the
rains noted in the diary of the weather were snows on the plain
and in some instances it snowed on the plains when only a small
mist was perseptable in the bottoms at our camps.    (The high
plains are about 800 feet higher than the Small bottoms on the
river and creeks.)23rdthe air is cold in the morning but warm through the day.    some
dew each morning.24thair remarkably pleasant all day.25thrained moderately the greater part of last night and untill a
little before sunrise. Thunder26ththe sun shone warm today, but the air was kept cool by the N W.
breezes27ththe dove is cooing which is the signal as the indians inform us of
the approach of the salmon. The snow has disappeared on the
high plains and seems to be diminishing fast on the spurs and
lower region of the Rocky Mountains.28thhad several heavy thunder showers in course of the last evening
and night.    the river from sunrise yesterday to sun rise this
morning raised 1 ft. 10 Incs.—    dift wood runing in consider-
able quantities and current incredibly swift tho' smooth.—29thfrequent and heavy showers attended by distant thunder
through the night.    the river raised 6 inches in the course of yes-
terday and 1 foot 5 I. in the course of the last night.    it is now as
high as there are any marks of it's having been in the spring
1805.—    at 10 A. M. it arrived at it's greatest hight having raised
1½ inches from sunrise to that time.    in the ballance of the day it
fell 7 inches.    the natives inform us that it will take one more rise
before it begins finally to subside for the season and then the pas-
sage of the mountains will be practicable.—30thrain slight last night.    the river continued to fall untill 4 A. M.
having fallen 3 I by that time since sunrise.    it now was at a stand
untill dark after which it began again to rise.31stwithin 3 Inches of its greatest hight on the 29th inst. and fell a
little after which it rose again. The river rose 13 inches last night
and continues to rise fast.    from sunset on the 31st of May untill
sun rise on the 1st of June it rose Eighteen inches and is now as
high as any marks of it's having been for several years past.    a
heavy thunder cloud passed around us last evening about sunset.
Some rain fell in the fore part of the night only.Lewis's weather diary and remarks for May 1806 appear in Codex K; Clark's appear in Voorhis No. 3. This version follows Lewis, with significant variations noted. Lewis may have written some of the material in Clark's table, but apparently none of the remarks.Clark has no columns for the rise and fall of the Kooskooske (Clearwater) River.Both Lewis and Clark have remarks in the margins of their weather tables and also separately. These follow Lewis with significant differences noted.Clark has "thick on Standing water."This remark appears only in Clark's Voorhis No. 3.Clark adds "eate a Horse."This remark appears only in Clark's Voorhis No. 3.The rest of this remark is not in Clark's notebook.This remark is found only in Clark's notebook for this day. It is given on the twenty-second by Lewis.The rest of this remark appears only in Clark's notebook.In Clark's notebook the comment "Thunder" is missing.The remainder of this remark is found only in Clark's notebook.