April 24, 1806LewisThursday April 24th 1806.
We were up early this morning and dispatched the men in surch of our horses, they were all found in a little time except McNeal's.    we hired an indian to surch for this horse it was one in the evening before he returned with him.    in the intermediate time we had 4 packsaddles made purchased three horses of the Wah-howpums, and hired three others of the Chopunnish man who accompanys us with his family and horses. we now sold our canoes for a few strands of beads, loaded up and departed at 2 P. M.    the natives had tantalized us with an exchange of horses for our canoes in the first instance, but when they found that we had made our arrangements to travel by land they would give us nothing for them I determined to cut them in peices sooner than leave them on those terms, Drewyer struck one of the canoes and split of a small peice with his tommahawk, they discovered us determined on this subject and offered us several strands of beads for each which were accepted.    we proceeded up the river between the hills and it's Northen shore.    the road was rocky and sandy alternately, the road difficult and fatieguing.    at 12 ms. we arrived at a village of 5 lodges of the Met-cow-wes, having passed 4 lodges at 4 and 2 at 2 Ms. further.    we ramined all night near the Met-cow-we lodges about 2 miles below our encampment of the [blank] of October last; we purchased three dogs and some shappellel of these people which we cooked with dry grass and willow boughs.    many of the natives pased and repassed us today on the road and behaved themselves with distant rispect towards us.    most of the party complain of the soarness of their feet and legs this evening; it is no doubt caused by walking over the rough stones and deep sands after bing for some months passed been accustomed to a soft soil.    my left ankle gives me much pain. I baithed my feet in cold water from which I experienced considerable releif. The curloos are abundant in these plains and are now laying their eggs.    saw the Kildee, the brown lizzard, and a Moonax which the natives had petted.    the winds which set from Mount Hood or in a westerly direction are much more cold than those from the opposite quarter.    there are now no dews in these plains, and from the appearance of the earth there appears to have been no rain for several weeks.—    we derected that the three horses which we purchased yesterday should be hubbled and confined to a picqut, and that the others should be disposed of in the same manner they were last evening.
ClarkThursday 24th April 1806
rose early this morning and Sent out after the horses all of which were found except McNeals which I hired an Indian to find and gave him a Tomahawk    had 4 pack Saddles made ready to pack the horses which we may purchase.    we purchased 3 horses, and hired 3 others of the Chopunnish man who accompanies us with his family, and at 1 P. M. Set out and proceeded on through a open Countrey rugid & Sandy between Some high lands and the river to a village of 5 Lodges of the Met-cow-we band haveing passed 4 Lodges at 4 miles and 2 Lodges at 6 miles. Great numbers of the nativs pass us on hors back    maney meet us and Continued with us to the Lodges.    we purchased 3 dogs which were pore, but the fattest we Could precure, and Cooked them with Straw and dry willow.    we Sold our Canoes for a fiew Strands of beeds.    the nativs had tantelized us with an exchange of horses for our Canoes in the first instance, but when they found that we had made our arrangements to travel by land they would give us nothing for them.    we Sent Drewyer to Cut them up, he Struck one and Split her    they discovered that we were deturmined to destroy the Canoes and offered us Several Strans of beeds which were acceptd    most of the party Complain of their feet and legs this evening being very Sore.    it is no doubt Causd. by walking over the rough Stone and deep Sand after being accustomed to a Soft Soil.    my legs and feet give me much pain. I bathed them in Cold water from which I experienced Considerable relief.    we directed that the 3 horses purchased yesterday should be hobbled and confined to pickquets and that the others Should be Hobbled & Spancled, and Strictly attended to by the guard    made 12 miles to day.—

Ordway
Thursday 24th of April 1806.    a clear cool morning.    we delay to purchase horses so as to leave the canoes.    one of our horses Strayed away last night.    we hired Indians to hunt him.    these Savages are numerous & tribe of wa-hopan, who come from a river to the North of this.    a number of them went at playing a game for beeds and other property in the Same manner as those below.    we purchased 3 horses & exchanged old axes &C. for beeds.    these Savages are tollerable well cloathed in dressed Deer and mountain Sheep Skins & buffaloe robes, but live poor at this time, as they expect the Salmon to run Soon.    we git pleanty of new Shappalell for Small articles.    they have a great number of horses.    the most of them are good to ride or pack.    the Indians found our lost horse.    we hired 2 more of Some of the flat heads who are going with us.    the Indians would not purchace our canoes, as they find we are going to leave them, but when we went to Split them they gave us 6 fathem of white beeds for them.    about 11 A. M. we loaded up our horses and Set out proceed on the Sandy road about 12 miles and Camped at a village where we bought a fiew dogs & gathered a fiew willows to Cook with &C.—


GassThursday 24th. The weather was pleasant. We lost another horse last night, and were detained here this morning, looking for him. We got six horses at this place, three of which were borrowed from an Indian who was going with his family along with us. We sold our two small canoes; and at 
noon an Indian who had gone to look for the lost horse returned with him. At 2 o'clock we all started by land on the north side of the river, accompanied by several of the natives with their families and horses. We entered the low country, the great and beautiful plains of Columbia, and proceeded on till evening when we encamped at two mat-lodges of the natives, and got two dogs and some shapaleel. The natives who were travelling in our party encamped with us.


These people are probably not a part of the Methows as suggested in a note for the entry of October 21, 1805, when Lewis and Clark first passed this region and noticed these people without naming them. The village is well within the historic territory of the Umatilla Indians. Ray (NVCB). The term mɨ́tx̣aw, however, seems to designate a Salish-speaking group. See October 21, 1805. The camp was in Klickitat County, Washington, roughly opposite the town of Blalock, Gilliam County, Oregon. Atlas map 77. See figure.Coues penciled the page number (80) for this codex in the blank date space; the date was October 20, 1805.Perhaps the long-billed curlew, Numenius americanus [AOU, 264]. Holmgren, 29. A vertical line runs through a few lines here, perhaps Biddle's mark.The killdeer, Charadrius vociferus [AOU, 273], already known to science. Holmgren, 31.Perhaps the western fence lizard, Sceloporus occidentalis, an animal new to science. Benson (HLCE), 89; Cutright (LCPN), 288, 428–29.Probably the yellow-bellied marmot, Marmota flaviventris.Lewis's word is from the Algonquian language; it is also part of the scientific name for the related woodchuck, M. monax. See August 20, 1805.Lewis and Clark have it as "Wah-how-pum" or some variation; they are the Teninos.In Klickitat County, Washington, opposite the town of Blalock, Gilliam County, Oregon,
in the territory of Umatilla Indians.A "Chopunnish" (probably Nez Perce), according to the captains.