March 4, 1806LewisTuesday March 4th 1806.
Not any occurrence today worthy of notice.    we live sumptuously on our wappetoe and Sturgeon.    the Anchovey is so delicate that they soon become tainted unless pickled or smoked.    the natives run a small stick through their gills and hang them in the smoke of their lodges, or kindle a small fire under them for the purpose of drying them.    they need no previous preperation of guting &c and will cure in 24 hours.    the natives do not appear to be very scrupelous about eating them when a little feated.—    the fresh sturgeon they keep for many days by immersing it in water.    they coock their sturgeon by means of vapor or steam.    the process is as follows.    a brisk fire is kindled on which a parcel of stones are lad.    when the fire birns down and the stones are sufficiently heated, the stones are so arranged as to form a tolerable level surface, the sturgeon which had been previously cut into large fletches is now laid on the hot stones; a parsel of small boughs of bushes is next laid on and a second course of the sturgeon thus repating alternate layers of sturgeon and boughs untill the whole is put on which they design to cook.    it is next covered closely with matts and water is poared in such manner as to run in among the hot stones and the vapor arrising being confined by the mats, cooks the fish.    the whole process is performed in an hour, and the sturgeon thus cooked is much better than either boiled or roasted.
The turtle dove and robbin are the same of our country and are found as well in the plain as open country.    the Columbian robbin heretofore discribed seems to be the inhabitant of the woody country exclusively.    The Magpy is most commonly found in the open country and are the same with those formerly discribed on the Missouri.    the large woodpecker or log cock, the lark woodpecker and the small white woodpecker with a read head are the same with those of the Atlantic states and are found exclusively in the timbered country. The blue crested Corvus and the small white breasted do have been previously discribed and are the natives of a piney country invariably, being found as well on the rocky mountains as on this coast.—    the lark is found in the plains only and are the same with those before mentioned on the Missouri, and not very unlike what is called in Virginia the old field lark.— The large blueish brown or sandhill Crain are found in the valley of the Rocky mountains in Summer and Autumn where they raise their young, and in the winter and begining of spring on this river below tidewater and on this coast. they are the same as those common to the Southern and Western States where they are most generally known by the name of the Sandhill crain. The vulture has also been discribed.    there are two species of the fly-catch, a small redish brown species with a short tail, round body, short neck and short pointed beak.    they have some fine black specks intermixed with the uniform redish brown.    this the same with that which remains all winter in Virginia where it is sometimes called the wren.    the second species has lately returned and dose not remain here all winter. it's colours are a yellowish brown on the back head neck wings and tail the breast and belley of a yellowish white; the tail is in proportion as the wren but it is a size smaller than that bird.    it's beak is streight pointed convex reather lage at the base and the chaps of equal length.    the first species is the smallest, in short it is the smalest bird that I have ever seen in America except the humming bird.    both these species are found in the woody country only or at least I have never seen them elsewhere.
ClarkTuesday March 4th 1806
Not any accurrance to day worthy of notice.    we live Sumptiously on our wappatoe and Sturgeon.    the Anchovey is so delicate that they Soon become tainted unless pickled or Smoked.    the nativs run a Small Stick through their gills and hang them in the Smoke of their Lodges, or Kindle Small fires under them for the purpose of drying them.    they need no previous preperation of gutting &c. and will Cure in 24 hours. the nativs do not appear to be very Scrupilous about eating them a little feated.
the fresh sturgeon they Keep maney days by immersing it in water. they Cook their Sturgeon by means of vapor or Steam.    the process is as follows.    a brisk fire is kindled on which a parcel of Stones are Sufficiently heated, the Stones are So arranged as to form a tolerable leavel Surface, the Sturgeon which had been previously cut into large flaetches is now laid on the hot Stones; a parcel of Small boughs of bushes is next laid on, and a Second course of the Sturgeon thus repeating alternate layers of Sturgeon & boughs untill the whole is put on which they design to Cook.    it is next covered closely with mats and water is poared in Such manner as to run in among the hot Stones, and the vapor arriseing being confind by the mats, cooks the fish.    the whole process is performd in an hour and the Sturgeon thus Cooked is much better than either boiled or roasted.    in their usial way of boiting of other fish in baskets with hot Stones is not so good.
The turtle doves and robin are the Same of those of our countrey and are found as well as the plains as open countrey.    the Columbia robin heretofore discribed Seams to be the inhabitent of the woody Country exclusively.    the magpye is most commonly found in the open Country and are the Same with those formerly discribed on the Missouri.
The large wood pecker or log cock the lark woodpecker and the common wood pecker with a red head as the Same with those of the Atlantic States, and are found exclusively in the timbered Country. The Blue crested Corvus and the Small white brested corvus are the nativs of a piney country invariably, being found as well on the Rocky Mountains as on this coast—. The lark is found in the plains only and are the Same with those on the Missouri and the Illinois and not unlike what is Called in Virginia the old field Lark.
The large bluish brown or Sandhill Crain are found in the Vally's of the Rocky Mountain in Summer and autumn when they raise their young and in the winter and beginning of Spring on this river below tide water and on this coast.    they are the same as those Common to the Southern and Western States where they are most generally known by the name of the Sand hill Crain. The Vulture has already been discribed.
There are two Species of fly Catch, a Small redish brown with a Short tail, round body, Short neck, and Short pointed beak, and the Same as that with us sometimes called the Wren.    the 2d Species does not remain all winter they have just returned and are of a Yellowish brown Colour.

Ordway
Tuesday 4th March 1806.    rained hard all last night and continues all this day.

Whitehouse
Tuesday March 4th    It rained hard all last night, & continued the same during the whole of this day.    Nothing material happened at the fort worth mentioning.—
Tuesday March 4th    It rained very hard all last night & continued so during this day, & nothing material happened during this day.—


Perhaps "fetid." A dark "x" covers the first part of this paragraph.The mourning dove, Zenaida macroura [AOU, 316]. A faint red vertical line goes through the first few lines of this paragraph, perhaps Biddle's doing.The previously described varied thrush; see above, January 31, 1806.The black-billed magpie, Pica pica [AOU, 475].Respectively, the pileated woodpecker, Dryocopus pileatus [AOU, 405], and the northern, or common, flicker, Colaptes auratus [AOU, 412], both new species. Logcock was a folk name for the pileated woodpecker, while lark woodpecker was used for flickers. Burroughs, 241–42; Holmgren, 32, 34.The red-breasted sapsucker, Sphyrapicus ruber [AOU, 403]. Burroughs, 241; Holmgren, 34.Steller's jay and the gray jay. See above, December 18, 1805.The western meadowlark, Sturnella neglecta [AOU, 501.1]. The "old field lark" is the eastern meadowlark, S. magna [AOU, 501].The California condor, described on February 16 and 17, 1806.The winter wren.Perhaps Hammond's flycatcher, Empidonax hammondii [AOU, 468]. Holmgren, 30. See also Coues (HLC), 3:876 n. 78.In slightly different wording, Whitehouse's copyist repeated an entry.