July 5, 1804ClarkJuly the 5th 1804    Set out verry early this morning, Swam the horse across the river, proceeded on for two miles under the bank where the old Kansas town formerly stood (Say in 1724)    The Cause of those people moveing from this place I cannot learn, but naterally conclude that War has reduced their nation & compelled them to retire further into the Plains with a view of defending themselves & opposeing their enemey (more effectually[)] on hors back (I neglected to mention yesterday that the Lake on the S. S. was large    Say ¾ me. wide & 7 or 8 long    one creek & Several brooks running into it from the hills, it contains Great quantities of Sun fish & Gosling's from which we gave it the name,) passed Some verry bad Sand bars Situated parrelel to each other, (1) the Boat turned three times once on the [Plat?] of a Drift wood. She recved no <dammage> proceiviable damage, we came to for Dinner at a Beever house, Cap Lewis's DogSeamon [Scannon] went in & drove them out.    the high Lands on the L. S. is open, a few trees Scattering    (2) passed a Small Creek on the L. S. in the ls[1st] bend to the left I call <Roses Creek> yellow oaker [ochre] creek from <the number of rose about &> a bank of that Mineral just above.    we camped on the L. S. under a high bank    Latd. 39° 25' 41" NorthCourse & Distance July 5th 1804N 35° E  1me. on the S. S. opposit the old village of KanzesS. 56° E  2Me. on the L. point a Large Eddey on the L. S. and a bad
Sand barEast—  1me. on L. S. a Sand bar in middle & &    (1) Boat turned 3.N. 18° W.  2mes. to a pt. on S. S. opsd. a Prarie    psd. a Creek L. S. (2)North  1me. on S. S.S. 70 E  3me. to a pt. of Willow on the L S.    wind from S E 10                                 
on the banks of this river I observe great quants of Grapes, berries & roses    Deer is not So plenty in this three days past as they were below that. Elks are plenty about those Praries. Some Buffalow Sign.
ClarkJuly 5th Thursday 1804
Set out verry early, proceeded on near the bank where the old village Stood for two miles, (Swam the hors found a few day ago)    passed Some bad Sand bars, The Origan of this old village is uncertain    M. de Bourgmont a French officer who Comdd. a fort near the Town of the Missouris in about the year 1724 and in July of the Same year he visited this Village    at that time the nation was noumerous & well desposed towards the french    Mr. Du Pratz must have been badly informed as to the Cane opposd this place    we have not Seen one Stalk of reed or cane on the Missouries, he States that the "Indians that accompanied M De Bourgmont Crossed to the Canzes Village on <rafts> floats of Cane"
Those people must have been verry noumerous at that time as Mr. De B: was accompanied by 300 Warriers, 500 young people & 300 Dogs of burthen out of this Village
The Cause of Those Indians moveing over to the Kanzis river I have never lernt—    we passed Some bad Sand bars, Situated parrelel to each other (1)    The Boat turned twice on the quick Sand & once on <the> a raft of Drift, no procievable damage    Prarie Contine on the high land on the L. S.    passsd a Small Creek (2)    on L. S. in the first bend to the L S. I call Yellow-Oaker Creek from a quantity of that Mineral in a bank a little above
The river Continue to fall a litte—    I observe great quantities of Summer & fall Grapes, Berries & Wild roases on the banks—    Deer is not so plenty as usual, great Deel of Elk Sign.    (Wind from S E)Course Distance & reffers. July 5N. 35° E  1me. on S. S. opsd. the pls. of Old Vilg.S 56° E  2me: to L. pt.    a eddey on L. S.East  1me. on L. S.    Sevl. Sand bars (1)N 18° W  2Ms. to a pt. on S. S. opsd a prarie pd. (2)North  1me. on the S. S.S. 70° E  3ms. to pt. of will. on L. S. 10 Ordway
Thursday July 5th 1804    we Set out verry eairly.    we Swam the white horse a cross this River, proceeded on for two miles under the bank where the old Kansas Town formerly Stood (Say in 1724)    the cause of those people moveing from this place we cannot learn, but naturly conclude that war has reduced their nation and compelled them to retire further into the plains with a view of Defending themselves. I did not mention on yesterday that the Lake on the north side was large say ¾ of a Mile wide & 7 or 8 miles long    one Creek & several Creeks running in to it from the hills    it contains a great quantity of fish and Goslings from which it takes its name, we passed Some verry bad Sand bars    the Boat turned three times once on a Drift wood, but recived no procevable Damage, we came too at a beaver house for Dinner.    the high land on the South Side is open    a fiew trees    Scattering, we passed a Small creek on the left named yallow Oakey Creek, we Camped on the South Side under a high bank.    the land on the opposite Side is well timbered Good bottom, fine place for a Range    verry thick high Rushes for common,


Floyd
Thursday July 5th 1804    Set out errley this morning    Swam ouer Stray Horse a Cross the River to Join our other Horses    prossed on for two miles under the Bank of the old Kansas village formaley Stood in 1724    the couse of the Indians moving from this place I cant <tell> Larn but natreley Concluded that war has reduced thair nation and Compelled them to Retir further in to the Plaines with a view of Defending themselves and to operserve their enemey and to Defende them Selves on Horse Back    encampt on the South Side   


GassThur. 5th.    We proceeded on our voyage at five in the morning; and found the land high on the south side. We went through a large bend full of sand-bars where we had some difficulty in passing; and encamped on the south side at high prairie land.


Whitehouse
Thursdy 5    Got on our way    Roed. a mile Up the prarie    Crossd the River with the white horse and left him with the others that the hunters had on the E. Shore    Roed. 10 Miles    Incampd at the Rock Prarie—
Thursday July 5th    We started early this morning, and rowed one Mile on our way; and took in the white horse and crossed the River with him, and landed him with the other horses on the No. East shore where the hunters had left them, and Encamp'd in the evening at the Rock Priari, distance come this day being 10 Miles
	
Biddle's notation at the top of this sheet of the Field Notes (document 28) reads, "July 5 to."One of several small streams in Doniphan County, Kansas. Quaife identifies it as rush Creek. Nicollet shows a "yellow ocher" creek at about the right spot. Quaife (MLJO), 92 n. 3; Nicollet (MMR), 374; MRC map 17; MRM map 47. Yellow ocher generally refers to the mineral limonite, used in pigments and, where found on the frontier in large masses, sometimes as a source of iron by blacksmiths.In Doniphan County, some miles northeast of Doniphan. There are a number of high banks in the area. MRC map 17.Etienne Véniard, Sieur de Bourgmont, a Frenchman of "an adventurous and undisciplined nature," was commandant of Detroit in 1705 and first visited the Missouri Indians in 1714. Having deserted, he lived for some time among the Missouris and Osages, marrying an Indian woman; eventually he received a pardon for desertion. He founded Fort Orleans, in Carroll County, Missouri, in 1723 (see above, June 16, 1804). At various times he explored up the Missouri River, possibly as far as the Arikara villages in South Dakota. After various ventures among the Plains tribes, he took a delegation of Indian chiefs to Paris in 1725 and apparently remained in France. Nasatir (BLC), 1:12–22; Houck, 1:31, 173, 223, 258–68; Barry, 13, 18–21, 27, 189.Antoine Simon Le Page du Pratz was a French military engineer who came to Louisiana in 1718 and spent sixteen years there, chiefly on the lower Mississippi. Clark is referring to the 1774 English translation of his three-volume Histoire de la Louisiane . . . (Paris, 1758). The passage that puzzled Clark occurs in an account of Bourgmont's 1724 mission to the Indians on the Kansas River. The confusion arises from a faulty translation; the "canes" do not appear in the original, which states that the Indians crossed the river in cajeux (rafts) made of unstated materials. Lewis borrowed a copy of the work from Benjamin Smith Barton of Philadelphia in 1803 and returned it to the owner after the expedition. It is now in the custody of the Library Company, in Philadelphia. Nasatir (BLC), 1:13, 17, 21, 56; Jackson (SBLC), 9–10; Cutright (LCD); Allen, 91, 96, 156, 178.Any of several small streams in Doniphan County, Kansas, at this point; see Clark's entry. Ordway seems to borrow heavily from Clark's Field Notes for this day's entry, and also for the
next.Yet another place-name given only by Whitehouse. The place is in Doniphan County, Kansas, some miles northeast of Doniphan.