October 14, 1804Clark14th of October Sunday 1804     Some rain last night    we Set out in the rain which continued all day    passed a Creek on the L. S. Piaheto 15 yds Wide,    halted on a Sand bar and had the punishmt inflicted on Newmon, which caused the indian Chieif to cry untill the thing was explained to him    Camped opposit an antient fortification which is on the L. S, when I explained to the Chief the Cause of whipping N—    he observed that examples were necessary & that he himself had made them by Death, but his nation never whiped even from their bearth.Course & DistanceS. 70° W3m to a <point on the L. S.> Bend on the L. SN. 63° W2m. to a point on the S. S.    passed a Creek L. SN. 30° W.1 ½to a Tree on the L. S.N 40° E.1 ½to Some trees on the S. S.N 60° W3m to <Some trees> a pt. on the L SN. 70°3m to a point on the S. S.—    passed an Antient fortification.Clark14th of October Sunday 1804.		
Some rain last night all wet & Cold,    we Set early the rain contind <untill> all <oClock> Day    at [blank] miles we passed a (1) Creek in the L. S. 15 yards wide    this Creek we Call after the 3rd Chief Piaheto (or Eagles feather)    at 1 oClock we halted on a Sand bar & after Dinner executed the Sentence of the Court Martial So far a[s] giveing the Corporal punishment, & proceeded on a fiew miles, the wind a head from N. E.    Camped in a Cove of the bank on the S. S.    imediately opposit our Camp on the L. Side I observe an antient fortification the walls of which appear to be 8 or 10 feet high, [NB: most of it washed in]    the evening wet and disagreeable, the river Something wider more timber on the banks
The punishment of this day allarmd. the Indian Chief verry much, he Cried aloud (or effected to Cry)    I explained the Cause of the punishment and the necessity [NB: of it,] <which> He [NB: also] thought examples were also necessary, & he himself had made them by Death, his nation never whiped even their Children, from their burth.14thCourses & Distance & reffurencs.S. 70° W.  1mes. to a pt. on the L. S.    the Same course continud 2
me. to a bend L. S.N. 63° W.  2mes. to the pt. on the S. S.    passd. a creek on the L. S. (1)N. 30° W.  1 ½me. to a large Tree in the L. S.N. 40° E  1 ½mes to Some trees on the S. S.N. 60° W.  3mes. to a pt. on the L. S.    PassingN. 70° W.  3miles to a point on the S. S.    passed an antient fortifica-
tion on the L. S.12 OrdwaySunday 14th Oct. Cloudy & rain.    we Set off eairly.    passed a bottom covered with Timber on S. S.    passd a creek & Black Bluffs on S. S.    we halted at 12 oClock on a Sand bar.    the proceedings of the Court martial was read & put in to Exicution.    it [rained] Slowly the greater part of the Day. Camped on N. S. below a Timbred Bottom.—


GassSunday 14th.    We had a cloudy morning and some rain. We proceeded early on our voyage; passed a bottom covered with timber on the south side and low ground covered with willows on the north; passed a creek and black bluffs on the south side and encamped on the north. It rained slowly during the whole of the day.


WhitehouseSunday 14th Oct. 1804.    cloudy.    Some rain.    we Set off eairly, proceeded on    passed a creek on the S. S.    campd. on the N. S.    nothing else extraordinary hapened this day.
Sunday October 14th    We sett off Early this morning and had some Rain, we proceeded on, & passed some bottoms of fine land, lying on the South side of the River, it continued raining all this day, We encamped on the North side of the River



In Codex C and on Atlas map 26 Clark has used both the Indian name of the Arikara chief for whom he named the creek and the English version, "Eagles Feather." Eagle Feather Creek, in Corson County, South Dakota, appears on MRC map 46; later it became Bald Head Creek. It enters the Missouri about a mile downstream from the state line. MRY map 119.On the starboard side, in Emmons County, North Dakota, their first camp in that state; Fire Heart Butte is roughly opposite on the other side. The campsite and the "antient fortification" are now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Atlas map 26; MRC map 47.This distance is one mile in Codex C.Clark wrote "untill [blank] oClock," then put "all" in the blank and interlined "Day."Clark'sPiaheto, or Eagles Feather, Creek, probably Baldhead Creek, Corson County, South Dakota, about a mile south of the North Dakota state line.