October 7, 1804Clark7th of October Sunday 1804    frost last night, passed a River 90 yds. wide the Ricaras Call Sur-war-kat-ne    all the water of this river runs in a chanel of 20 yards, the Current appears jentle, I walked up this River a mile, Saw the tracks of white bear, verry large, also a old Ricara village partly burnt, fortified    about 60 Lodges built in the Same form of those passed yesterday, many Canoes & Baskets about the huts—    about 10 oclock we Saw 2 Indians on the S. S.    they asked <cours> for Something to eat & told us they were Tetons of the band we left below on ther way to the Ricaras we gave them meat & wind hard from the South, passed a large open Island covered with grass and wild rye, I walked on the Isd & 4 men they <our> Killed a Braroe & a Black tale Doe with a black breast, the largest Deer I ever saw, the great numbers of Grous on it, we call it Grous Island, Camped opposit the Island near the S. Side.Course Distanc & reffurenceN. 42° W.2m. to the mouth of Sur-war-kar-ne river L. S.N. 30° E.3 ½miles to a Bend S. S.N 30° W.2m. to a pt. of high land L. S.N. 35° W.7m. on the L. S.N. 10° W.1m. on the L. S. to a pt.—.N. 80° W.3m. to the left Side of Grous IslandN.45° W.1m. to the head of Sd Isd.West2 ½M to a point on the main S. S.    [High open?] lands on both
SidesClark7th of October Sunday 1804
a Cloudy morning, Some little rain frost last night, we Set out early proceeded on 2 <½> miles to the mouth of a (1) river on the L. S. and brackfast    this river whin full is 90 yards wide    the water is at this time Confined within 20 yards, the Current appears jentle, this river throws out but little Sand    at the mouth of this river we Saw the Tracks of White bear which was verry large, I walked up this river a mile—    below the (2) mouth of this river, is the remains of a Rickorrie Village or Wintering Camp fortified in a circular form of a bout 60 Lodges, built in the Same form of those passed yesterday    This Camp appears to have been inhabited last winter, many of their willow & Straw mats, Baskets & Buffalow Skin Canoes remain intire within the Camp, <we passed> the Ricares Call this river Sur-war-kar-na or Park [NB: Rr.]    from this river [NB: which heads in the 1st black mountains] we proceeded on under a gentle Breeze from the S. W.    at 10 oClock we Saw 2 Indians, on the S. S.    they asked for Something to eate, & informed us they were part of the Beiffs De Medisons [NB: Beuffles de Medecines] Lodge on their way to the Rickerreis, passed (3) a willow Island in a bind to the S. S.    (4) at 5 miles passd. a willow Island on the S. S.—    wind hard from the South    in the evening I walked on an (5) Island nearly the middle of the river Called <Shaved> Grous Island, [NB: (the wall of a village on this island)] one of the men killed a Shee Brarrow, another man killed a Black tail Deer, the largest Doe I ever Saw (Black under her breast[)]    this Island is nearly 1¼ ms. Squar no timbr high and Covered with grass wild rye and Contains Great numbers of Grouse, we proceeded on a Short distance above the Island and Camped on the S. S.    a fine evening.7th OctoberCourse Distance & ReffurenceN. 42° W.  2miles to the mouth of a River Caled Sur war car notre a
bend to the S. S. (1)    a village at Mo: (2)N. 30° E  3 ½me to a Clump of bushes in a bend to the S. S. passing for
¾ mile on the L. S.N. 30° W.  2miles to a pt. of high land on the L Side, passed a willow
Island (3)N. 35° W.  7on the L. Side    passed a Sand bar on the S. S. (4).N. 10° W.  1mile on the L. S. to a pt.N. 80 W.  3miles to the left Side of an Island (5) in the mid riverN. 45° W.  1mile to the head of the <timbered la> willows at the head
of the Sd. <Shaved> Grouse Isld.West  2 ½to a point on the main S. S.    a large Sand bar from the
upper point of the Island    high land on both Sides op-
posit this Island. 22 OrdwaySunday 7th Oct. 1804.    a clear & pleasant morning. We Set off at day light.    proceeded on    passed a creek on N. S. called [blank]    halted took breakfast at a River named [blank] where their was an old Rickree village built in the Same Manner as that we passd yesterday on S. S.    passd a timbered Bottom on S. S. abo. mo. of this River    a Small Shower of rain    the wind more from the S. Sailed on    Saw 2 of the Souix Indians on N. S. Spoke to
them    they Sd. they wanted Something to eat & that their band was a going up to the Rickrees, we Gave them Some Venison & proceeded on to an Island about 4 oC. I went out with Capt. Clark & 2 men hunters on Sd. Island to hunt.    we killed a Black tailed Deer which was verry large especially the Ears & a handsome Brarow which Capts. had the Bones & skin Saved in order to Send back to the States.    we Camped on N. S. abo. the head of Sd. Isl. where I came on board


GassSunday 7th.    We set forward early and had a clear day: passed a willow bottom on the south side, and a creek on the north. At the beginning of some timber land we passed a small river on the south side, called Cer-wer-cer-na, about 90 yards wide. It is not so sandy as the Missouri, and the water is clear, with a deep channel. At the mouth of this river is a wintering camp of the Rickarees of 60 lodges. We saw two Sioux Indians on the north side, gave them some meat and proceeded on. We passed an island, on which Captain Clarke and one of the men went to hunt and killed a deer and a prarow. We encamped on the north side opposite the head of the island.


WhitehouseSunday 7th Oct. 1804.    we Set off eairly.    a clear day.    passed a creek on the N. S. Goodrich and a Small River on the S. S. called Sir war about 90 yards wide.    at the mouth of this River is a wintering camp of the Rickarees having about 60 lodges.    we Saw 2 of the Souix indians on the N. S.    Capt. Clark killed a Deer and a brarow.    we Camped on the N. S. opposite the head of an Island.—
Sunday October 7th    This morning we had clear weather.    We set out Early and passed a Creek lying on the North side of the River, and a small River lying on the South side of the same, this River is called Sirawa, and is about 70 Yards wide at its Mouth.—    At the Mouth of this River <is> We saw, a Wintering Camp of the Rick a Rees Indians, containing about 60 lodges; We saw two of the Souix Indians on the North side of the River.    Captain Clark went on Shore on the South side of the River, & killed one deer and a brarerow which was brought on board.    We encamped on the North side of the River, opposite the head of an Island.—


The Moreau River reaches the Missouri in Dewey County, South Dakota. The Arikara village appears on Atlas map 25. Mattison (OR), 78; MRC map 44.Grouse Island is the later Blue Blanket Island, between Dewey and Walworth counties, South Dakota; it is now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Clark noted the walls of an abandoned village on the island on Atlas map 25, but did not comment on it in the text, although there is an interlineation reference in the codex journal. The village appears to have been a short-lived Arikara site probably occupied during the 1780s to 1790s. Stephenson. The grouse are probably the sharp-tailed grouse. Burroughs, 211–12; Cutright (LCPN), 81.Just above Blue Blanket (Grouse) Island, in Walworth County, near the present town of Mobridge. Mattison (OR), 85; Atlas map 25; MRC map 45.The text of the entry is interrupted here by the courses and distances; the two parts are brought together for ease of reading.Probably Clark'sOtter Creek, now Swan Creek, Walworth County, South Dakota.Moreau River, Dewey County.No one else attaches Silas Goodrich's name to Clark'sOtter Creek, now Swan Creek, 
Walworth County, South Dakota.