December 10, 1805ClarkDecember 10th 1805 Tuesday
A Cloudey rainy morning    those people was Some what astonished, at three Shot I made with my little riffle [rifle] to day, a gangu of Brant Set in the little river, I Killd. 2 of them as they Set, and on my return Saw a Duck which I took the head off of, the men plunged into the water like Spaniards Dogs after those fowls, after eateing a brackfast which was Similar to my Suppar, I attempted to purchase Some fiew roots which I offered red beeds for, they would give Scercely any thing for Beeds of that Colour, I then offered Small fish hooks which they were fond of and gave me Some roots for them, I then Set out on my return by the Same road I had went out accompd. by my young Chief by name Cus-ca-lar who Crossed me over the 3 Creek, and returned    I proceeded on to my Camp thro a heavy Cold rain, Saw no game—    at the Sea Cost near those Indins I found various kinds of Shells, a kind of Bay opsd. those people with a high pt. about 4 miles below, out from which at Some dists I Saw large rocks, as the day was Cloudy I could not See distinctly—    found Capt Lewis with all hands felling trees, to build with, rained nearly all day, in my absence they men had bt. in the 6 Elk which was Killed Some days past    4 men complaining of being unwell from various causes
ClarkTuesday 10th December 1805
a Cloudy rainey morning    verry early I rose and walked on the Shore of the Sea coast and picked up Several Curious Shells.    I Saw Indians walking up and down the beech which I did not at first understand the Cause of, one man came to where I was and told me that he was in Serch of fish which is frequently thrown up on Shore and left by the tide, and told me [NB: in English] the "Sturgion was verry good" and that the water when it retired left fish which they eate    this was Conclusive evedance to me that this Small band depended in Some Measure for their winters Subsistance on the fish which is thrown on Shore and left by the tide—    after amuseing my Self for about an hour on the edge of the rageing Seas I returned to the houses, one of the Indians pointed to a flock of Brant Sitting in the creek at Short distance below and requested me to Shute one, I walked down with my Small rifle and killed two at about 40 yds distance, on my return to the houses two Small ducks Set at about 30 Steps from me    the Indians pointed at the ducks they were near together, I Shot at the ducks and accidently Shot the head of one off, this Duck and brant was Carried to the house and every man Came around examined the Duck looked at the gun the Size of the ball which was 100 to the pound and Said in their own language Clouch Musket, [NB: English word Musket] wake, com ma-tax Musket which is, a good Musket do not under Stand this kind of Musket &c. I entered the Same house I Slept in, they imediately Set before me their best roots, fish and Surup—, I attempted to purchase a Small Sea otter Skin for read beeds which I had in my pockets, they would not trade for those beeds not priseing any other Colour than Blue or White, I purchased a little of the berry bread and a fiew of their roots for which I gave Small fish hooks, which they appeared fond of—    I then Set out on my return by the Same rout I had Come out accompanied by Cus-ka lah and his brother as far as the <Second> 3d Creek, for the purpose of Setting me across, from which place they returned, and I proceeded on through a heavy rain to the Camp at our intended fort, Saw a bears track & the tracks of 2 Elk in the thick woods—    found Capt Lewis with all the men out Cutting down trees for our huts &c.    in my absence the Men brought in the Six Elk which was killed Several days ago—.    4 men Complaining of violent Coalds.    three Indians in a Canoe Came up from the Clat Sop Village yesterday and returned to day. The Sea Coast is about 7 miles distant Nearly West about 5 miles of the distance through a thick wood with reveens hills and Swamps the land, rich black moald 2 miles in a open wavering Sandy prarie, ridge runing parrelal to the river, Covered with Green Grass.
Ordway
Tuesday 10th Decr. 1805.    the Indians left us this morning.    all hands wen[t] at clearing away the ground for the huts.    rained hard the most of the day, towards evening Capt. Clark and 3 of his party returned from the ocean and informed us that it was about 7 miles to the ocean the way they blazed a road.    they was at a Small village of the Clatsop nation of Indians on the Coast.    they treated them in a friendly manner.    considerable of prarie land on the Coast &C. Some low marshes also.—


GassTuesday 10th.    We had another wet cloudy morning; and all hands were employed at work notwithstanding the rain. About 2 o'clock Capt. Clarke and 3 of his party returned to camp; the other two remained out to hunt. They found the ocean to be about 7 miles from our camp; for 4 miles the land high and closely timbered: the remainder prairie cut with some streams of water. They killed an elk and saw about fifty in one gang. They also saw three lodges of Indians on the seashore. The natives which were at our camp, went away this morning after receiving some presents. In the evening we laid the foundation of our huts.


Whitehouse
Tuesday Decemr. 10th    Captain Clark and the party that went with him to the Ocean did not return this morning and the Indians that staid with us during the last night, left us this morning.    The party that was at Camp all turned out & were employed in cutting of Pickets & carrying them to the place where our Officers intend erecting a fort.    It rain'd the most part of this day.    Towards evening Captain Clark & three of the Men that went with him returned from the Ocean.—    They informed us that they had blazed a Road, through the Woods, from the Ocean; which they supposed to be about 7 Miles.    They found 3 Indian huts, which lay on the Edge of the Ocean, which was Inhabited.    The Indians who resided in these huts, informed Captain Clark & his party, that there was a considerable number of Indians; who resided further up along the Coast.    The party that were with Captain Clark had killed one Elk, and saw two Gangs of the same kind of animals.    The Indians at those huts, gave our Men plenty of pounded fish & Roots to eat, & behaved very friendly.    The land between this & the Ocean is cover'd with Pine Trees, & on the Coast, low flatt land considerable Priaries & some swamps, in which grows Cranberries, [illegible] berries &ca.—
Our officers concluded on to build our huts of logs, & to picket them in from the Corners



Spaniels according to Criswell, 80.Tillamook Head, Clatsop County, Oregon. Atlas map 84.The sentence is in the Chinook jargon: ƛuš musket, wek kǝmtǝks musket, "[it is a] good musket, [I do] not understand [this] musket."At Seaside, Clatsop County, Oregon; see Clark's entry for December 9.Drouillard and Shannon, according to Clark's entry of December 9.A Clatsop Indian village at the site of present Seaside, Clatsop County, Oregon, at the mouth of the Necanicum River.