July 13, 1804Clark
My notes of the 13th of July by a Most unfortunate accident blew over Board in a Storm in the morning of the 14th obliges me to refur to the <notes> Journals of Serjeants, and my own recollection [of] the accurrences Courses Distance &c. of that day—    last night a violent Storm from the N. N, E.—    (1) passed Tar-ki-o River, at 2 miles a chanl. running into this river 3 ms. abov forms St Josephs Isld.  Passed an elegt Prarie in the 1st bend to the left. Conta[in]ing a grass resmlg Timothy, with Seed like flax, (2) passed a Island in a bend to the S. S. at 12 ms. I walked on Shore S. S.    lands, low & overflows, Killed two Goslings nearly Grown, Sailed under a Wind from the South all day, Camped on a Sand Island on the L. Pt. opposit a high & extensiv Prarie, on the S. S. the Hills about 4 or 5 me. off, this Plain appears extensive, great appearance of a Storm from the North W.    this evening verry agreeable    the wind Still from the South—John Ordway FG
Appere. from Camp
from the Osagies Nation with twenty odd of the Natives or chiefs of the Nation with him [sa]iled dowen the Mississippi bound to St Louis & 3 guns fired    [show]ers or rain    Showers of Rain all that nightCourse Distance & reffurrence July 13 1804N. 8° E1Me. to Pt. on S. S.    passed the Sand IslandN. 28 E3 ½me. to pt. on L. S.    psd. Tar-ki o R.St. Joseps Isd.
L. S. (1)S. 70° W3 ms. to pt. on S. S. opsd. a Prarie (2)N 46° W.1 ½ms. on the S. point opsd. the Prarie & a Hill L. S.N. 30° W1 ½Ms. to a pt. on L. S.N. 45° W4 ½Ms. to a pt. on L. S.    passd a Island & Sand bar (3)N. 66 W3 ½Ms. to a pt. on S. S.N. 8 W.2Ms. to a pt. on L. S. leaving a Sand Island on which
we camped to the left, on this Island I lost my notes,
in a Storm.20 ½ClarkJuly 13th Friday 1804
Set out at Sun rise, and prosd. on under a gentle Breeze, at two miles passed the mouth of a Small river on the S. S. Called by the Indians Tar-ki-o, a Channel running out of the river three miles above (which is now filled up with Sand) runs into this Creek & and formed a Island Called St. Josephs    Several Sand bars parralel to each other above—    In the first bend to the left is Situated a Butifull & extensive plain, Cover'd with Grass resembling Timothy except the Seed which resembles Flax Seed, this plain also abounds in Grapes of defferent Kinds    Some nearly ripe. I Killed two Goslings nearly Grown, Several others Killed and cought on Shore, also one old Goose, with pin fethers, She Could not fly—    at about 12 miles passd. a Island Situated in a bend on the S. S.    above this Island is a large Sand bar Covered with willows. The wind from the South, Camped on a large Sand Bar makeing out from the L. P.    opposit a high hanson Prarie, the hills about 4 or 5 miles on S. S.    this plain appeard extensive, the Clouds appear to geather <fro> to the N. W.    a most agreeable Breeze from the South    (I walked on Shore on the S. S.    the lands are low Subject to overflow)
Last night at about 10 oClock a violent Storm of wind from the N. N. E. which lasted with Great violence for about one hour, at which time a Shower of rain Succeeded.Course Distance & Reffrs. July 13thN. 8° E1me. to pt. on S. S.    psd <the> Sd. Isld.N. 28° E3 ½Ms. to pt. on L. S.    psd. Riv & Isd. (1)S 70° W3ms. to pt. on S. S. opsd. a prarie (2)
N. 46° W.1 ½me. on S. S. opsd. the Prarie & a HillN. 30° W.1 ½ms. to a pt. on L. S.N. 45° W.4 ½Ms. to a pt. on L. S.    psd. an Isd. (3)N. 66° W.3 ½Ms. to a pt. on S. S.N. 8° W.2Ms. to a pt. on L. S. a Sand Isd.20 ½ Miles    
The men on Shore did not join us this after noon—    The river nearly on a Stand—    the high lands on the S. S. has only been Seen at a Distance <on th> above the Nordaway River, those on the S. L. aproaching the river at every bend, on the Side next to the river well timbered, the opsd. Side open & the Commencmt. of Plains.

Ordway

Friday July 13th 1804.    we Set out at Sun rise, proceeded on    passed the Mouth of the Big Tar ki o River.    last night at 10 oClock a violent Storm from the N. N. E. which lasted for one hour.    a small Shower succeded the wind.    the Latidude of yesterday 39d 55" 56' Long. [blank]    passed a prarie level and beautiful below Some high hills, containing an amence Site of Grapes, wild Rye &.C—    Capt. Clark killed 2 Goslins, Drewyer 2 also—    the wind favourable from the South, the men Caught 2 Geese on a Sand barr    one an old one (the old Geese have pin feathers yet cannot fly.)    Since passing the Nodaway River the hills could only be Seen in a fiew places at a great Distance from the River on the North Side of the Missauris. But on the South Side their is high Land, & handsome praries the most of the way from the old Village of the Kansars, we Camped on a large Sand bar in the mi. of the River opposite a high &extensive prarie, on the North Side, (came about 20 miles today)




Floyd
Friday July 13th    Set out erley in the morning    prosed on our Jorney    passed a Creek on the N. Side Called the Big <ne ma har>Tarkuo River    it is about 40 yads wide and verry mirey for Horses to Cross    the Land is Low    a verry hard Storm Last night from the N. E. which Lasted for about one ouer    proseded with a Small Souer of Rain    wind fare    Sailed all day    Came 20½ miles    Camt on a Sand Bare in the midel of the River    a Small Shouer of Rain
	
GassFriday 13th.    We were early under way this morning with a fair wind. The day was fine. We passed a creek on the north side, and having made 20 miles and an half, encamped on a large sand bar.


Whitehouse
Friday 13    Got under way Early and Swim the horses across a Creek Tar Kia, for the hunters    the wind Rose    pass Several Islands Is On Our labourd.    Saild [21?] Miles.    Campd. On the little Sandy Isle Oppesite the Hurrican prarie—
Friday July 13th    This morning we set out early, and swam the horses across a Creek called Tar Kia, for the hunters.    The wind rose, and we passed several Islands on our South side, We sail'd 2½ Miles & encamped on an Island called little sandy Island, opposite the hurricane Priari.—


Biddle's notation at the upper left-hand corner of this sheet of the Field Notes (document 31) reads, "14 July to 18."Ordway also refers to Clark's difficulties in making up his lost notes. This strongly indicates that there was no daily journal by Lewis for the period to which he could refer. Also, Clark must have been delaying at least a day or two in copying his Field Notes into his notebook journal Codex A. See Introduction to Volume 2.The Tarkio River, otherwise Big Tarkio Creek, reaches the Missouri River in Holt County, Missouri. It seems likely that in 1804 and for the rest of the century, the mouth was some miles farther down the Missouri than it is now. MRC map 19; MRR maps 54, 55.Using the present course of the Missouri River, we would place this camp in eastern Richardson County, Nebraska."John Orway FG" is written beside the courses and distances for July 13. "FG" may be "Sg," perhaps for "Sergeant." Over the above is written, "Appere. from Camp," which may be in Clark's hand and unrelated to the rest, which appears to be in Ordway's hand. The subsequent lines are upside down between the courses and distances and the main entry, partially under the latter. They may refer to the return of Auguste or Pierre Chouteau at River Dubois from the Osages on April 22, 1804 (see above).What appears to be "Day" and one or two illegible letters are written vertically directly above the numeral "(1)," at right angles to the courses and distances. The connection with the rest of the material is not apparent.According to Ordway, one of the men was Reubin Field, who was in charge of the horses. Another, noted on July 14 by Clark, was Goodrich.Once again Whitehouse uses a name given by no one else; the reference may be to the violent wind of the next day, which Floyd calls "a Dredfulle hard Storme."An error for 20½.