June 24, 1805LewisMonday June 24th 1805.
Supposing that Drewyer and R. Fields might possibly be still higher up medicine river, I dispatched J. Fields up the river with orders to proceede about four miles and then return whether he found them or not and join Shannon at this camp. I set out early and walked down the South West side of the river and sent Shannon down the opposite side to bring the canoe over to me and put me across the Missouri; having landed on the Lard. side of the Missouri I sent Shannon back with the canoe to ascend the Medicine river as far as his camp to meet J. Fields and bring the dryed meat at that place to the camp at the white bear Islands which accomplished and arrived with Fields this evening.    the party also arrived this evening with two canoes from the lower camp.    they were wet and fatiegued, gave them a dram. R. Fields came with them and gave me an account of his & Drewyer's hunt, and informed me that Drewyer was still at their camp with the meat they had dryed.    the iron frame of my boat is 36 feet long 4½ F. in the beam and 26 Inches in the hole.This morning early Capt. Clark had the remaining canoe drawn out of the water; and divided the remainder of our baggage into three parcels, one of which he sent today by the party with two canoes. The Indian woman is now perfectly recovered. Capt. C. came a few miles this morning to see the party under way and returned.    on my arrival at the upper camp this morning, I found that Sergt. Gass and Shields had made but slow progress in collecting timber for the boat; they complained of great difficulty in geting streight or even tolerably streight sticks of 4½ feet long.    we were obliged to make use of the willow and box alder, the cottonwood being too soft and brittle. I kept one of them collecting timber while the other shaved and fitted them. I have found some pine logs among the drift wood near this place, from which, I hope to obtain as much pitch as will answer to pay the seams of the boat. I directed Fraizer to remain in order to sew the hides together, and form the covering for the boat.ClarkJune 24th Monday 1805
a Cloudy morning I rose early had, the remaining Canoe hauled out of the water to dry and divided the baggage into 3 parcels, one of which the party took on their backs & one waggon with truk wheels to the Canoes 3 miles in advance    (Those Canoes or 5 of our Canoes were Carried up the Creek 1¾ of a mile taken out on the bank and left to dry from which place they are taken up a point and intersects this rout from the mouth of the Creek at 3 miles from the foot of the rapids)    after getting up their loads they divided men & load & proceeded on with 2 canoes on truck wheels as before, I accompaned them 4 miles and returned, my feet being verry Sore from the walk over ruts Stones & hills & thro the leavel plain for 6 days proceeding Carrying my pack and gun. Some few drops of rain in the fore part of the day, at 6 oClock a black Cloud arose to the N West, the wind shifted from the S to that point and in a short time the earth was entirely Covered with hail, Some rain Succeeded, which Continud for about an hour very moderately on this Side of the river, without the earths being wet ½ an inch, the riveins on the opposit or N W Side discharged emence torrents of water into the river, & Showed evidently that the rain was much heavyer on that Side, Some rain at different times in the night which was worm—    Thunder without lightning accompanied the hail Cloud OrdwayJune 24th Monday 1805.    a cloudy morning.    all hands rose eairly.    had halled the remaining canoe out of the water to dry.    we divided the baggage in to 3 percels, one of which the party took on their backs and one waggon with truck wheels, to the canoes 3 miles in advance loaded and proceeded on with 2 canoes being in 2 parties. put the baggage in to the canoes & went on verry well to the creek called willow creek.    one of the waggon tongues broke which detained us a Short time.    then proceeded on towards evening when we got within about three miles of the upper Camp, a volent Shower arose from the N. W.    hard thunder    caught us in a verry hard rain So that in a fiew minutes the ground was covered with water. So that we got a hearty drink of water in the holes & puddles &.C.    the rain continued about half an hour, at dusk we arived at the upper Camp all wet and much fatigued. Capt. Lewis revived us with a dram.    we found Shamnon their who had been up the medicine River hunting.    he had killed 3 buffalow 8 Deer several antelopes but no Elk. the wind was considerable assistance to us in the course of the day, as we were drawing the canoes the wind being Sufficently hard at times to move the canoe on the Trucks.    this is Saleing on dry land in everry Since of the word,



GassMonday 24th.    In the morning Capt. Lewis came up to our camp. We found it very difficult to procure stuff for the boat. The two men which Captain Lewis had left in the morning came to our camp in the afternoon, but had seen nothing of the other two hunters. In the evening there was a very heavy shower of rain; at night the weather cleared up, and the men arrived with two more canoes. The two hunters which Captain Lewis could not find, had killed some buffaloe below the mouth of the Medicine river, where one remained, and the other had gone across to the camp below the falls again, but had found no elk.WhitehouseMonday 24th June 1805.    a fair morning.    we halled out the last canoe, & turned hir up to dry.    all the party present Set out eairly with a waggon & baggage &c. for the upper Camp.    we had Some difficulty in gitting the loading up on the high plains to where the canoes were left last night, though after a little fatigue we got all the loading which we intended carrying at this load in 2 Canoes & proceeded on to a creek called willow creek 7 miles from the lower Camp & halted to refresh ourselves.    made a tongue to one of the truck waggons, & proceeded on    the wind blew Steady from the S. East.    we hoisted a Sail in, the largest canoe which helped us much as 4 men halling at the chord with a harness.    passed through high Smoth delightful plains.    Saw a nomber of antelopes & buffalow.    towards evening when we were within about 3 miles of the upper Camp, their came up of a Sudden a violent thunder Shower & rained a mazeing hard, for about 15 or 20 minutes, in which time the water Stood on the ground over our mockasons. our water being all gone and all the men thursty drunk harty out of the puddles.    at dusk we arived at the upper camp, and unloaded found Some of the baggage wet by it raining in the canoes &c.    we found Shannon here.    he had been incamped up the medison River.    he had killed 3 buffalow 8 Deer & several antelopes but no Elk.
Monday June 24th    This morning we had fair weather, We hawled up our last Craft & turned her up to dry; all the party present set off, with a Carriage, having baggage &ca. for the upper Camp.    We had some difficulty in getting the loading up, on the high plains where our Crafts was left last night, though after some trouble we got all the loading to where we intended carrying it at this time; in the two Crafts, and proceeded on to a Creek, which we called Willow Creek 7 Miles from the lower Camp, where we halted to refresh ourselves, and made a tongue to one of our Truck Carriages.—
We proceeded on, the wind blowing steady from the South east, We hoisted sail in our largest Craft (or Canoe) which assisted us as much, as 4 Men hawling at a Rope; We passed through, high smooth delightfull plain, where we saw a number of Antelopes & Buffalo in Gangs & flocks.—    towards Evening when we were within about 3 Miles of the upper Camp, there came up of a sudden a Violent thunder shower, & it rained amazingly hard; for about 15 or 20 Minutes, in which time the water stood on the ground over our Moccasins—    Our Water being all gone, & the Men very thirsty, they drank heartily, out of the puddles of water that lay in the plains—    At dusk of the Evening we arrived at the upper Camp and unloaded our Carriage, & found that some of our baggage had got wet, by the rain, (that were in the Crafts.)—    We found Shannon, the Man that had left the two hunters, at the upper Camp.    He had been encamped up the Medecine River, & had killed 3 Buffalo, 8 Deer & several Antelopes, but had seen no Elk—


Or Willow Run, now Box Elder Creek, Cascade County, Montana.Items needed for the iron-framed boat included straight sticks four and one-half feet long, for the framework of the boat, and pine logs from which to extract pitch to make the covering waterproof.Joseph Field and Shannon; see June 23 and Lewis's entry for this day.Drouillard and Reubin Field.Drouillard remained at the Sun (Medicine) River camp, while Reubin Field returned.