August 13, 1806Clark<Wednesday> Friday 13th August 1806 [EC: Friday correct]
the last night was very Cold with a Stiff breeze from the N. W.    all hands were on board and we Set out at Sunrize and proceeded on very well with a Stiff breeze astern the greater part of the day.    passed the enterance of the Little Missouri river at 8 A. M. and arived at the Enterance of Myry river at Sun Set and encamped on the N E Side haveing came by the assistance of the wind, the Current and our oars 86 miles. below the little bason I with Drewyer walked through the N. E. point. we Saw an Elk and Several deer. Drewyer wounded the Elk but could not get him. I joined the perogus & party again the bend below and proceeded on. Some indians were Seen in a Skin Canoe below, they were decending from an old Camp of theirs on the S. W. Side, those I suppose to be Some of the Minetaras who had been up on a hunting expedition, one Canoe was left at their Camp.    we had not proceeded far before I discovered two indians on a high hill.    nothing very remarkable took place. the Misquetors are not So troublesom this evening as they have been. the air is cool &c.
Ordway
Wednesday 13th August 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set out eairly and procd. on <about 9 A. M. we arived at our old neighbours the Grousevauntaus and Mandans    we Saluted them by fireing our Swivvel our blunderbuss Several times.—> verry well    a fair breeze from the N. W.    came a long distance this day and Camped on the N. Side.—

GassWednesday 13th.    After a stormy night of wind and rain we set out early in 
a fine morning; about nine o'clock passed the Little Missouri and went on very well during the whole of the day. In the evening those in some of the small canoes, which were ahead, saw Indians, who fled before they could speak to them. At night we encamped opposite an old wintering village of the Grossventres, which had been deserted some time ago.



"Myry Creek," which the party first passed on April 9, 1805, is now Snake Creek in McLean County, North Dakota. The campsite, which must now be under Garrison Reservoir, would be in McLean County northeast of present Riverdale. Mattison (GR), 7, 27; Atlas maps 33, 46, 55; MRC map 52.The "little bason" in Mercer and McLean counties, North Dakota, first passed on April 10, 1805, appears on Atlas maps 33, 46, 55; MRC map 53.This crossed-out material was rewritten into the next day's entry.Mandans or Hidatsas (Gass's "Grossventres").