August 19, 1806ClarkTuesday 19th of August 1806
Some rain last night and this morning the wind rose and blew with great Violence untill 4 P. M and as our camp was on a Sand bar we were very much distressed with the blows of Sand. I directed the hunters to proceed on down the bottom and kill and butcher Some meat and if the wind Should lie that I should proceed on down to their Camp &c. Capt. Lewis'es wounds are heeling very fast, I am much in hope of his being able to walk in 8 or 10 days—.    at 4 P. M the wind Seased to blow with that violence which it had done all day we Set out and proceeded on down.    the hunters which was Sent out this morning killed 4 Elk & 12 deer near the river we came too and brought in the most of the flesh and proceeded on to a Sand on the N E Side and Encamped.    the wind rose and become very Strong from the S. E. and a great appearance of rain. Jessomme the Interpreter let me have a piece of a lodge and the Squars pitched or Stretched it over Some Sticks, under this piece of leather I Slept <under> dry, it is the only covering which I have had Suffecient to keep off the rain Since I left the Columbia.    it began to rain moderately Soon after night. The indians appear well Satisfyed with the party and mode of proceedure.    we decended only 10 miles to day    Saw Some Elk and buffalow on the Shore near where we Encamped.    the Elk beginning to run. the Buffalow are done running & the bulls are pore.
Ordway
Tuesday 19th August 1806.    a Showery morning. Thunder and high wind So it detained us.    the hunters went out & killed 5 Elk 10 deer.    about 4 P. M. the wind fell a little and we procd. on    took on board the best of the meat which was below and Campd. at dark.    windy & cold.—


GassTuesday 19th.    This was a cloudy windy morning; and the water so rough, that our small canoes could not safely ride the waves: so we remained here and several of the men went out to hunt. We do not go on so rapidly as we did higher up the river: but having lashed our small canoes together, we go on very safe and can make 50 or 60 miles a day Captain Lewis is getting much better and we are all in good spirits. At 3 o'clock in the afternoon the wind ceased, and we proceeded on, and met with our hunters on the bank, who had killed six elk and eleven deer. We took the meat on board, proceeded on, and encamped on a sand-beach.


As Clark notes, their camp was some ten miles below the previous night's camp, in Burleigh County, North Dakota, probably near the camp of October 19, 1804, on the opposite side. The site is probably now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Atlas map 28; MRC map 49.Four o'clock, Clark says.