May 11, 1806LewisSunday May 11th 1806.
The last evening we were much crouded with the indians in our lodge, the whole floor of which was covered with their sleeping carcases.    we arrose early and took breakfast.    at 8 A. M. a cheif of great note among these people arrived from his village or lodge on the S. side of Lewis's River.    this is a stout fellow of good countenance about 40 years of age and has lost the left eye.    his name is Yoom-park'-kar-tim.    to this man we gave a medal of the smal kind.    those with the likeness of Mr. Jefferson have all been disposed of except one of the largest size which we reserve for some great Cheif on the Yellow rock river.    we now pretty fully informed ourselves that Tunnachemootoolt, Neeshneparkkeeook, Yoom-parkkartim and Hohâstillpilp were the principal Cheif of the Chopunnish nation and ranked in the order here mentioned; as all those cheifs were present in our lodge we thought it a favourable time to repeat what had been said yesterday and to enter more minutely into the views of our government with rispect to the inhabitants of this western part of the continent, their intention of establishing trading houses for their releif, their wish to restore peace and harmony among the natives, the strength power and wealth of our nation &c.    to this end we drew a map of the country with a coal on a mat in their way and by the assistance of the snake boy and our interpretters were enabled to make ourselves understood by them altho' it had to pass through the French, Minnetare, Shoshone and Chopunnish languages.    the interpretation being tedious it ocupyed nearly half the day before we had communicated to them what we wished.    they appeared highly pleased.    after this council was over we amused ourselves with shewing them the power of magnetism, the spye glass, compass, watch, air-gun and sundry other articles equally novel and incomprehensible to them.    they informed us that after we had left the Minnetares last spring that three of their people had visited that nation and that they had informed them of us and had told them that we had such things in our possession but that they could not place confidence in the information untill they had now witnessed it themselves.—    A young man, son of a conspicuous cheif among these people who was killed not long since by the Minnetares of Fort de Prarie, brought and presented us a very fine mare and colt.    he said he had opened his ears to our councils and would observe them strictly, and that our words had made his heart glad.    he requested that we would accept this mear and colt which he gave in token of his determination to pursue our advise.—    about 3 P. M. Drewyer arrived with 2 deer which he had killed.    he informed us that the snow still continued to cover the plain. many of the natives apply to us for medical aid which we gave them cheerfully so far as our skill and store of medicine would enable us.    schrofela, ulsers, rheumatism, soar eyes, and the loss of the uce of their limbs are the most common cases among them.    the latter case is not very common but we have seen thee instances of it among the Chopunnish.    it is a very extraordinary complaint.    a Cheif of considerable note at this place has been afflicted with it for three years, he is incapable of moving a single limb but lies like a corps in whatever position he is placed, yet he eats heartily, digests his food perfectly, injoys his understanding, his pulse are good, and has retained his flesh almost perfectly, in short were it not that he appears a little pale from having lain so long in the shade he might well be taken for a man in good health. I suspect that their confinement to a diet of roots may give rise to all those disorders except the rheumatism & soar eyes, and to the latter of these, the state of debility incident to a vegetable diet may measureable contribute.—    The Chopunnish notwithstanding they live in the crouded manner before mentioned are much more clenly in their persons and habitations than any nation we have seen since we left the Ottoes on the river Platte.—    The Twisted hair brought us six of our horses.
ClarkSunday 11th May 1806
Some little rain last night.    we were Crouded in the Lodge with Indians who continued all night and this morning Great numbers were around us. The One Eyes Chief Yoom-park-kar-tim arived and we gave him a medal of the Small Size and Spoke to the Indians through a Snake boy Shabono and his wife.    we informed them who were were, where we Came from & our intentions towards them, which pleased them very much.    a young man Son to the great Cheif who was killed not long Sence by the Indians from the N. E. brought an elegant mare and Coalt and Gave us.    and Said he had opend. his ears to what we had Said and his heart was glad and requested us to take this mare and Coalt as a token of his deturmination to pursue our Councels &c. The twisted hair brough Six of our horses all in fine order. Great numbers of Indians apply to us for medical aide which we gave them Cherfully So far as our Skill and Store of Medicine would enable us. Schrofla, ulsers, rhumitism, Sore eyes, and the loss of the use of their Limbs are the most common cases among them.    the latter Case is not very common but We have Seen 3 instances of it among the Chopunnish.    a very extraordinery complnt. about 3 P. M. Geo. drewyer arived with 2 deer which he had killed.    he informed us that the Snow Still Continued to cover the plains. We are now pretty well informed that Tunnachemootoolt, Hohâstillpilp, Neshneparkkeeook, and Yoomparkkartim were the principal Chiefs of the Chopunnish Nation and ranked in the order here mentioned; as all those chiefs were present in our lodge we thought it a favourable time to repeet what had been said and to enter more minutely into the views of our government with respect to the inhabitents of this Western part of the Continent, their intention of establishing tradeing houses for their relief, their wish to restore peace and harmony and among the nativs, the Strength welth and powers of our Nation &c.    to this end we drew a map of the Country with a coal on a mat in their way, and by the assistance of the Snake boy and our interpeters were enabled to make ourselves under stood by them altho' it had to pass through French, Minnetare, Shoshone and Chopunnish languages.    the interpretation being tegious it occupied the greater part of the day, before we had communicated to them what we wished.    they appeared highly pleased.    after this Council was over <they> we amused ourselves with Shewing them the power of Magnetism, the Spye glass, compass, watch, air gun and Sundery other articles equally novel and incomprehensible to them.    they informed us that after we left the Menetares last Spring that 3 of their people had visited that nation, and that they had informed them of us, and had told them that we had Such things in our possession but that they Could not place Confidence in the information untill they had now witnessed it themselves—.
In the evening a man was brought in a robe by four Indians and laid down near me.    they informed me that this man was a Cheif of Considerable note who has been in the Situation I see him for 5 years.    this man is incapable of moveing a single limb but lies like a corps in whatever position he is placed, yet he eats hartily, dejests his food perfectly, enjoys his under standing, his pulse are good, and has retained his flesh almost perfectly; in Short were it not <for> that he appears a little pale from having been So long in the Shade, he might well be taken for a man in good health. I Suspect that their Confinement to a deet of roots may give rise to all the disordes of the Nativs of this quarter except the Rhumitism & Sore eyes, and to the latter of those, the State of debility incident to a vegitable diet may measureably contribute.—. The Chopunnish not withstanding they live in the Crouded manner before mentioned are much more clenly in their persons and habitations than any nation we have Seen Sence we left the Illinois. These nativs take their fish in the following manner to wit.    a Stand Small Stage or warf consisting of Sticks and projecting about 10 feet into the river and about 3 feet above the water on the extremity of this the fisherman stands with his guig or a Skooping Net which differ but little in their form those Commonly used in our Country    it is formed thus    with those nets they take the Suckers and also the Salmon trout and I am told the Salmon also.Ordway
Sunday 11th of May 1806.    a fair morning.    a number of the natives who were diseased came to our officers to be healed    Capt. Clark applyed meddison and done all possable for them.    one of the Indians gave Capt. Clark a fine horse. George Drewyer Came in from hunting.    had killed two Deer.    the Indians brought us Several more of our horses &C.    in the evening we fiddled and danced a while.    the natives assembled to See us.

GassSunday 11th.    This was a fine clear morning; and we lay here all day. The natives treat us very well; the officers practise as physicians among their sick, and they gave them a very handsome mare and colt. About 12 o'clock our hunter came in and brought two deer with him. We now find a great many more men among the Indians than when we went down last fall; and several chiefs, which had them been out at war. In the evening the natives brought in six more of our horses.


His name apparently meant "Five Big Hearts;" the Nez Perce term may be hiyó·mpa·x̣atimina. Wheeler, 2:267; Josephy (NP), 11.The medal would be the 105mm Jefferson medal; see August 3, 1804. The captains expected that Clark would meet Indians on his exploration of the Yellowstone River, and the medal was reserved for the most prominent chief among them. In fact, he did not encounter any Indians on the Yellowstone.Another indication of the widespread intertribal trade routes; these Nez Perces probably visited the Hidatsas in company with their sometime friends and allies the Crows.The Atsinas; see May 28, 1805.Scrofula is tuberculosis of the lymph glands. It is sometimes accompanied by abscesses and fistulae, which may be the symptoms Lewis is referring to here. See also October 10, 1805. Chuinard (OOMD), 324 and n. 11.Perhaps a case of hysterical paralysis, since no organic problem could be detected. Another suggestion, however, is polymyositis. Cutright (LCPN), 295; Ronda (LCAI), 286 n. 34.The name appears to have been added to a blank space.A sketch of the net in Voorhis No. 3 (fig. 16).Perhaps the mountain sucker, Catostomus platyrhynchus, elsewhere called a bottlenose; see March 12, 1806.Drouillard.