June 25, 1806LewisWednesday June 25th 1806.
last evening the indians entertained us with seting the fir trees on fire.    they have a great number of dry lims near their bodies which when set on fire creates a very suddon and immence blaze from bottom to top of those tall trees.    they are a beatifull object in this situation at night. this exhibition reminded me of a display of fireworks.    the natives told us that their object in seting those trees on fire was to bring fair weather for our journey.— We collected our horses readily and set out at an early hour this morning.    one of our guides complained of being unwell, a symptom which I did not much like as such complaints with an indian is generally the prelude to his abandoning any enterprize with which he is not well pleased.    we left them at our encampment and they promised to pursue us in a few hours.    at 11 A. M. we arrived at the branch of hungary creek where we found R. & J. Feilds.    they had not killed anything.    here we halted and dined and our guides overtook us.    at this place I met with a plant the root of which the shoshones eat.    it is a small knob root a good deel in flavor an consistency like the Jerusalem Artichoke.    it has two small oval smooth leaves placed opposite on either side of the peduncle just above the root.    the scape is only about 4 inches long is round and smooth.    the roots of this plant formed one of those collections of roots which Drewyer took from the Shoshones last summer on the head of Jefferson's river.    after dinner we continued our rout to hungary Creek and encamped about one and a half miles below our encampment of the 16th inst.—    the indians continued with us and I beleive are disposed to be faithfull to their engagement. I gave the sik indian a buffaloe robe he having no other covering except his mockersons and a dressed Elkskin without the hair. Drewyer and Sheilds were sent on this morning to hungry Creek in surch of their horses which they fortunately recovered.—
ClarkWednesday June 25th 1806
last evening the indians entertained us with Setting the fir trees on fire.    they have a great number of dry limbs near their bodies which when Set on fire create a very Sudden and emmence blaize from bottom to top of those tail trees.    they are a boutifull object in this Situation at night.    this exhibition remide me of a display of firewoks.    the nativs told us that their object in Setting those trees on fire was to bring fair weather for our journey—. We Collected our horses and Set out at an early hour this morning.    one of our guides Complained of being unwell, a Symptom which I did not much like as such complaints with an indian is generally the prelude to his abandoning any enterprize with which he is not well pleased.    we left 4 of those indians at our encampment they promised to pursue us in a fiew hours.    at 11 A. M. we arrived at the branch of hungary Creek where we found Jo. & R. Fields.    they had not killed anything.    here we halted and dined and our guides overtook us.    at this place the squaw Collected a parcel of roots of which the Shoshones Eat.    it is a Small knob root a good deel in flavour and Consistency like the Jerusolem artichoke.    it has two Small Smooth oval leaves placed opposit on either Side of the peduncle just above the root.    the scope is only about 4 inches long is round and Smooth.    the roots of this plant forms one of the Colection of roots which D—. took from the Shoshones last fall on the head of Jefferson river.    after dinner we continued our rout to hungary creek and encamped about one and a half miles below our Encampment of the 16th inst:— The indians all continue with us and I beleive are disposed to be faithfull to their engagements. Capt. L. gave the Sick indian a Small buffalow robe which he brought from the Missouri, this indian having no other Covering except his mockersons and a dressed Elk Skin without the hair—. Drewyer & Shields were sent on this morning to hungary Creek in serch of their horses which they fortunately recovered.—.    came [blank] miles to daye.

Ordway
Wednesday 25th June 1806.    a little rain last night.    we took an eairly breakfast and Set out    proceeded on    about noon we came to an open place or Small prarie    joined the 2 Fields    we find the Snow has melted considerable Since we passd    we dined and proceed. on to hungry Creek & found the 2 horses we lost here a fiew days past.    the after part of the day
Showery and wet    we Camped eairly as their is no grass near a head.

GassWednesday 25th.    There was a light shower of rain this morning. We proceeded forward early; and two men and an Indian were sent ahead to look for the horses we left behind when we were here before. At noon we halted at the creek where the two men were hunting, but they had killed nothing. We here took dinner, and proceeded on to Hungry creek, where we met the men with the horses, and encamped for the night. A considerable quantity of rain had fallen during the afternoon.



A good description of western spring beauty, Claytonia lanceolata Pursh. It is one of the first species to bloom in spring, and its white flowers would have been evident where snow had recently melted along the trail. The roots are small but very good-tasting. Clark's entry for the day credits Sacagawea, "the squaw," with collecting the roots. This is one of the few documented instances where Sacagawea is clearly credited with bringing a botanical item to the attention of the captains. The species was unknown to science at the time, and Lewis collected the type specimen two days later. Hitchcock et al., 2:229; Cutright (LCPN), 306, 308, 406. The Jerusalem artichoke used for comparison is Helianthus tuberosus L. Drouillard brought a specimen of western spring beauty to Lewis on August 22, 1805, but the captain was unable to describe it sufficiently at that time. It was tentatively identified in the editorial note at Nuttall sunflower, H. nuttallii T. & G. It is now clear that the species he saw then and the one he describes here is western spring beauty.Probably at or near the main party camp of September 19, 1805, on an unnamed creek running into Hungery Creek in Idaho County, Idaho; it is marked "Campd 19th" on Atlas map 71. Space, 14, 35; Peebles (RLC), 24; Peebles (LT), map.Probably at or near the main party's camp of September 19, 1805, on an unnamed creek running into Hungery Creek, Idaho County, Idaho.Drouillard and Shields were sent ahead to Hungery Creek, as indicated by Lewis and Clark.The Field brothers, as the captains and Ordway note.Drouillard and Shields.