December 5, 1803ClarkDecember the 5th
Set out this morning before sun rise, passed the upper point the Island at two miles, In this Course I observed (1), Several caves, also a number of Indented Arches of deferent sises in the Clifts on the Larbd. Side, which gave it a verry romanteck appearance, we passed Several Small Creeks on the Larbd. side in the Course.—    I came to at the lower point of a large Sand bar, forming an Island on the Starbd Side, and took Meredien altitude of ☉'s L. L. and found it 59° 37' 30"—    Error of Sextn. as usial.    (2) passed between two Islands, of about one mile in length, one near the Center of the River and the other close to the Larbd. Side hideing the mouth of a large Creek called Platea; (3) which is a Streen suficient large to aford water for mills (several of which are now established on the Creek) at all Seasons. The Emigrent amercains are Settled verry thick up this Creek, as also, on one we pass'd about four miles above called Swacken [or Swachen] Creek, those Creeks head with the waters of the River St. Francies    at the mouths of those Creeks is the first Settlements on the River above St. Geniesviur, (4) I came to on Lbd. side for the men to eate Dinner    above a rock forming a worft [wharf] into the river 200 feet, as the Current of the river sets imedeately against this rock, we had some difecualty in passing it—    this Rock appears to be Composed of Grit well calculated for Grind Stones—    about half a mile above Swachen Crk on the Starboad Side is the mouth of the Leagle, a Creek running from Bell fontain 12 miles distant from its mouth, passing thro a thick Settlement of Americans in all its Course—    at the mouth of this Creek I intended to land and take in Some Provisions which was to be delivered to me at this place—    by enquriey I was Informed (by Mr. Blear [or Blean] the owner of the place) that no provisions had arrived.    he "expected it every minete," the water being Shole, I proceeded on half a mile above the landing, and came to for the night—  The distance from Kaskaskies to this place is Called 37 miles by water—    The high Lands which sets in opposit St. Genesvieve, Continues with Small intervales of Low Land on that Side of the Mississippi, the other appearing low and Subject to be overflowedThe Courses &c. December 5thCourseTimeDist.refurrences & rmks. h mmiles N. 44° W.3 407 ½To mo. of Plate Creek on Lbd Side passing a pt. on the Stbd Side. pasd the upr. pt. of Isd. on which we camped at 2 miles pds. 3 Sml. creeks in this course (1)N. 26° W.4 05 ¾To pt. on Stbd. Side at the Mouth of Leagle. psd Sand bar on Stbd. side    (2) pd. betwn. 2 Is: & Plate creek Lbd. Side    (3) psd. Swachen [or Swacken] creek Lbd. Side    (4) pd. Leagle Cr:N. 12° W.0 22" ½To a Sand bar about ½ a mile below an Isld. on Stbd. Side 8 213 ¾ Probably Cornice Island (larboard) and Calico Island (starboard). Raynolds & Simpson, map 4.
Platten Creek, at present Crystal City, Jefferson County, Missouri.Anglo-Americans had considerable trouble with the name of Joachim Creek, which enters the Mississippi at Herculaneum, Jefferson County. "Swashon" was another version. Quaife (MLJO), 71 n. 2; Houck, 1:355 n. 44.
From the French "L'Aigle"; a later name was the English translation, Eagle Creek. Now Fountain Creek in Monroe County, Illinois. Quaife (MLJO), 72 n. 1.
Bellefontaine has been absorbed by the present town of Waterloo, Monroe County. The original settlement, founded in 1779, was on the trail between Fort de Chartres and Cahokia and was one of the first American communities north of the Ohio River. Ibid.; Howard, 57–58, 70; Illinois Guide, 494–95; Alvord, 359, 407.
Daniel Blouin was a merchant in Kaskaskia in the 1760s, and Louis Blouin was also active in the Illinois region in the same period. "Blean" may be one of these, or a relative. Houck, 1:342–43.
In Monroe County, a little above Fountain (Eagle) Creek.
