March 20, 1806LewisThursday March 20th 1806.
It continued to rain and blow so violently today that nothing could be done towards forwarding our departure.    we intended to have Dispatched Drewyer and the two Fieldses to hunt near the bay on this side of the Cathlahmahs untill we jounded them from hence, but the rain rendered our departure so uncertain that we declined this measure for the present.    nothing remarkable happened during the day.    we have yet several days provision on hand, which we hope will be sufficient to subsist us during the time we are compelled by the weather to remain at this place.—
Altho' we have not fared sumptuously this winter and spring at Fort Clatsop, we have lived quite as comfortably as we had any reason to expect we should; and have accomplished every object which induced our remaining at this place except that of meeting with the traders who visit the entrance of this river.    our salt will be very sufficient to last us to the Missouri where we have a stock in store.—    it would have been very fortunate for us had some of those traders arrived previous to our departure from hence, as we should then have had it our power to obtain an addition to our stock of merchandize which would have made our homeward bound journey much more comfortable.    many of our men are still complaining of being unwell; Willard and Bratton remain weak, principally I beleive for the want of proper food. I expect when we get under way we shall be much more healthy.    it has always had that effect on us heretofore. The guns of Drewyer and Sergt. Pryor were both out of order.    the first was repared with a new lock, the old one having become unfit for uce; the second had the cock screw broken which was replaced by a duplicate which had been prepared for the lock at Harpers ferry where she was manufactured.    but for the precaution taken in bringing on those extra locks, and parts of locks, in addition to the ingenuity of John Shields, most of our guns would at this moment been untirely unfit for use; but fortunately for us I have it in my power here to record that they are all in good order.
ClarkThursday March 20th 1806
It continued to rain and blow so violently to day that nothing could be done towards forwarding our departure.    we intended to have dispatched Drewyer & the 2 Field'es to hunt above Point William untill we joined them from hense but the rain renders our departure So uncertain that we decline this measure for the present.    nothing remarkable happened dureing the day.    we have yet Several days provisions on hand, which we hope will be Sufficient to Serve us dureing the time we are compell'd by the weather to remain at this place.—.
Altho' we have not fared Sumptuously this winter & Spring at Fort Clatsop, we have lived quit as comfortably as we had any reason to expect we Should; and have accomplished every object which induced our remaining at this place except that of meeting with the traders who visit the enterance of this river.    our Salt will be very sufficient to last us to the Missouri where we have a Stock in Store.—    it would have been very fortunate for us has Some of those traders arrived previous to our departure from hence; as we Should then have had it in our power to obtain an addition to our Stock of merchandize, which would have made our homeward bound journey much more comfortable.
Maney of our men are Still Complaining of being unwell; Bratten and Willard remain weak principally I believe for the want of proper food. I expect when we get under way that we Shall be much more healthy.    it has always had that effect on us heretofore.
The Guns of Sergt. Pryor & Drewyer were both out of order.    the first had a Cock screw broken which was replaced by a duplicate which had been prepared for the Locks at Harpers Ferry; the Second repared with a new Lock, the old one becoming unfit for use.    but for the precaution taken in bringing on those extra locks, and parts of locks, in addition to the ingenuity of John Shields, most of our guns would at this moment been entirely unfit for use; but fortunate for us I have it in my power here to record that they are in good order, and Complete in every respect—

Ordway
Thursday 20th March 1806.    rained hard the grater part of last night and continues this morning. So we are only waiting for good weather to Start.    their has been 150 odd Elk killed by this party in the course of the last winter and 20 deer.    the party has now got in all 338 pair of good Mockasons    the most of them good Elk Skins Mockasons.

GassThursday 20th.    The whole of this day was wet and disagreeable. We intended to have set out today on our return, but the weather was too bad. I made a calculation of the number of elk and deer killed by the party from the 1st of Dec. 1805 to the 20th March 1806, which gave 131 elk, and 20 deer. There were a few smaller quadrupeds killed, such as otter and beaver, and one raccoon. The meat of some of the elk was not brought to the fort.

Whitehouse
Thursday March 20th    A Rainey wet day.    We are now waiting for fair weather in Order to make a Start to the United States.    the party has killed 155 Elk & 20 Deer since we came to this place.    The party has now among them 338 pair of good moccosins.    The most of them are strong & made out of Elk skins



This ends the daily entries in Lewis's Codex J; the rest of the codex consists of weather diaries for the months January–March 1806, reading backwards (pp. 145–52). On the flyleaf at the end of the notebook are the following figures:      35        82[8?]0
See also Appendix C.Ordway counts "150 odd" and Gass, 131.