December 4, 1805ClarkDecember 4th Wednesday 180[5]
Some little rain all the last night and this morning after day the rain increased and Continued
I despatched Serjt. Pryer & 6 men to the Elk which he had killed yesterday, with directions to Save the meet and take loads to the River below in the next great bend—    a Spring tide which rose 2 feet higher than Common flud tides, and high water at 11 oClock to day—    wind from the S. E in the after noon    hard wind from South—    rained all day, moderately    the Swells too high for me to proceed down, as I intended, I feel my self Something better and have an appetite to eate Something
ClarkWednesday 4th December 1805
Some rain all the last night, this morning it increased with the wind from the S. E.    I Set out Sergiant Pryor and 6 men to the Elk he had killed with directions to Carry the meat to a bay which he informed me was below and as he believed at no great distance from the Elk, and I Should proceed on to that bay as Soon as the wind would lay a little and the tide went out in the evening—    the Smoke is exceedingly disagreeable and painfull to my eyes, my appetite has returned and I feel much better of my late complaint—    a Spring tide to day rose 2 feet higher than Common flood tides and high water at 11 oClock—    Hard wind from the South this evening, rained <hard> moderately all day and the waves too high for me to proceed in Safty to the bay as I intended, in Some part of which I expected would be convenient for us to make winter quarters, the reports of seven huntes agreeing that elke were in great abundance about the Bay below.    no account of Capt. Lewis.    I fear Some accident has taken place in his craft or party

Ordway
Wednesday 4th Decr 1805.    a rainy wet morning. Sergt. Pryor & Six men Set out to go and dress and take care of the Elk meat.    continued Storming & high wind all day.—

GassWednesday 4th.    We had a cloudy rainy morning. The river was so rough, we could not set with the canoes and six or seven men were sent to dress the elk that had been killed, and take care of the meat. The rain continued all day.


Whitehouse
Wednesday Decemr 4th    A rainey wet morning.    Serjeant Pryor & six men of our party set off, to go out to where the Elk meat was left, to take care of it & to bring it to the River, against we should move our Camp down.    The day continued Rainey, the Wind blew hard & the weather was stormy.    We have not as yet heard from Captain Lewis.—


Six men under Pryor.