January 21, 1806LewisWednesday [NB: Tuesday] January 21st 1806.
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labuish returned having killed three Elk. Ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning and the hunters to return and continue the chase.    the Indians left us about 12 O'Clk. The root of the thistle, called by the natives shan-ne-táh-que is a perpendicular fusiform and possesses from two to four radicles; is from 9 to 15 Inces in length and about the size a mans thumb; the rhind somewhat rough and of a brown colour; the consistence when first taken from the earth is white and nearly as crisp as a carrot; when prepared for uce by the same process before discribed of the white bulb or pashshequo quawmash, it becomes black, and is more shugary than any fuit or root that I have met with in uce among the natives; the sweet is precisely that of the sugar in flavor; this root is sometimes eaten also when first taken from the ground without any preperation; but in this way is vastly inferior.    it delights most in a deep rich dry lome which has a good mixture of sand.    the stem of this plant is simple ascending celindric and hisped.    the root leaves yet possess their virdure and are about half grown of a plale green.    the cauline leaf as well as the stem of the last season are now dead, but in rispect to it's form &c. it is simple, crenate, & oblong, reather more obtuse at it's apex than at the base or insertion; it's margin armed with prickles while it's disks are hairy, it's insertion decurrent and position declining.    the flower is also dry and mutilad.    the pericarp seems much like that of the common thistle.    it rises to the hight of from 3 to 4 feet.—
ClarkThursday [EC: Tuesday] 21st of January 1806
Two of the hunters Shannon & Labieche returned haveing killed three Elk, ordered a party to go in quest of the meat early tomorrow morning and the hunters to return and continue the chase—.    the indians left us about 12 oClock.
The root of the thistle called by the nativs Chan-ne-tâk-que is pirpendicular and possesses from two to 4 radicles; is from 9 to 15 inches in length and is Commonly about the Size of a mans thum    the rhine Somewhat rough and of a brown Colour; the Consistence when first taken from the earth is white and nearly as Crisp as a Carrot, when prepared for use by the Same process before discribed of the white bulb or pash she quo, qua-mosh, it becomes black and is more Sugary than any root I have met with among the nativs; the Sweet is prosisely that of the Sugar in flavor, this root is Sometimes eaten when first taken from the ground without any preperation, in this way it is well tasted but soon weathers and becoms hard and insipped.    it delights most in a deep rich moist lome which has a good mixture of Sand—    The Stems of this plant is Simple ascending celindric and hisped.    the root leaves, possess their virdue and are about half grown of a deep Green.    the Cauline leaf as well as the Stem of the last Season are now dead, but in respect to it's form &c. it is Simpl Crenated and oblong, rather more obtuce at it's apex than the base or insertion, it's margin armed with prickles while it's disks are hairy, its insertion decurrent and position declineing.    the flower is also dry and mutilated    the pericarp seems much like that of the Common thistle    it rises to the hight of from 3 to 4 feet.

Ordway
Tuesday 21st    Cloudy and rain.    in the afternoon 2 of our hunters Shannon & Labuche came to the fort    had killed three Elk.—

Whitehouse
Tuesday Janry 21st    A Cold cloudy day with Rain.    In the afternoon 2 of our Men came in from hunting.    they had killed 2 Elk.—




The edible thistle. The "pashshequo quawmash" used for comparison is the camas. See above, September 20, 1805, for linguistic information on the camas, and November 21, 1805, for the thistle. Someone has drawn a vertical line through this passage in pencil.Beginning with the next paragraph, a red vertical line runs to the end of the entry, perhaps drawn by Biddle.Shannon and Labiche, according to Lewis and Ordway.