April 22, 1806LewisTuesday April 22cd 1806
Last night two of our horses broke loos from the picquits and straggled off some little distance, the men who had charge of them fortunately recovered them early.    at 7 A. M. we set out having previously sent on our small Canoe with Colter and Potts.    we had not arrived at the top of a hill over which the road leads opposite the village before Charbono's horse threw his load, and taking fright at the saddle and robe which still adhered, ran at full speed down the hill, near the village he disengaged himself from the saddle and robe, an indian hid the robe in is lodge. I sent our guide and one man who was with me in the rear to assist Charbono in retaking his horse which having done they returned to the village on the track of the horse in surch of the lost articles    they found the saddle but could see nothing of the robe the indians denyed having seen it; they then continued on the track of the horse to the place from whence he had set out with the same success.    being now confident that the indians had taken it I sent the Indian woman on to request Capt. C. to halt the party and send back some of the men to my assistance being determined either to make the indians deliver the robe or birn their houses. they have vexed me in such a manner by such repeated acts of villany that I am quite disposed to treat them with every severyty, their defenseless state pleads forgiveness so far as rispects their lives.    with this resolution I returned to their village which I had just reached as Labuish met me with the robe which he informed me he found in an Indian lodg his behind their baggage. I now returned and joined Capt Clark who was waiting my arrival with the party.    the Indian woman had not reached Capt C. untill about the time I arrived and he returned from a position on the top of a hill not far from where he had halted the party.    from the top of this emmenense Capt. C. had an extensive view of the country.    he observed the range of mountains in which Mount Hood stands to continue nearly south as far as the eye could reach.    he also observed the snow clad top of Mount Jefferson which boar S. 10 W. Mount Hood from the same point boar S. 30 W.    the tops of the range of western mountains are covered with snow. Capt C. also discovered some timbered country in a Southern direction from him at no great distance. Clarks river [NB: Towarnahiooks] which mouths immediately opposite this point of view forks at the distance of 18 or 20 miles form hence, the wright hand fork takes its rise in mount Hood, and the main branch continues it's course to the S. E. [NB: 10 or 12 miles higher up another fork comes in from Mt. Jefferson]    we now made the following regulations as to our future order of march (viz) that Capt. C. & myself should devide the men who were disencumbered by horses and march alternately each day the one in front and the other in rear.    haveing divided the party agreeably to this arrangement, we proceeded on through an open plain country about 8 miles to a village of 6 houses of the Eneshur nation, here we observed our 2 canoes passing up on the opposite side; the wind being too high for them to pass the river they continued on.    we halted at a small run just above the village where we dined on some dogs which we purchased of the inhabitants and suffered our horses to graize about three hours.    there is no timber in this country we are obliged to purchase our fuel of the natives, who bling it from a great distance.    while we halted for dinner we purch a horse.    after dinner we proceeded on up the river about 4 miles to a village of 7 mat lodges of the last mentioned nation.    here our Chopunnish guide informed us that the next village was at a considerable distance and that we could not reach it tonight.    the people at this place offered to sell us wood and dogs, and we therefore thought it better to remain all night.    a man blonging to the next village above proposed exchanging a horse for one of our canoes, just at this moment one of our canoes was passing.    we hailed them and ordered them to come over but the wind continued so high that they could not join us untill after sunset and the Indian who wished to exchange his horse for the canoe had gone on. Charbonoe purchased a horse this evening.    we obtained 4 dogs and as much wood as answered our purposes on moderate terms.    we can only afford ourselves one fire, and are obliged to lie without shelter, the nights are cold and days warm.—    Colter and Pots had passed on with their canoe.
ClarkTuesday 22nd of April 1806
last night 2 of our horses broke loose and Strayed of at a Short distance.    at 7 oClock we loaded up and Set out, haveing previously Sent off the Canoe with Colter and Potts    we had not arived at the top of the hill which is 200 feet before Shabonos horse threw off his load and went with great Speed down the hill to the Village where he disengaged himself of his Saddle & the robe which was under it, the Indians hid the robe and delayed Capt. Lewis and the rear party Some time before they found the robe which was in a lodge hid behind their baggage, and took possession of it.    dureing the time the front of the party was waiting for Cap Lewis, I assended a high hill from which I could plainly See the range of Mountains which runs South from Mt. Hood as far as I could See. I also discovered the top of Mt. Jefferson which is Covered with Snow and is S 10° W. Mt. Hood is S. 30° W.    the range of mountains are Covered with timber and also Mt Hood to a sertain hite. The range of Mountains has Snow on them. I also discovered some timbered land in a S. derection from me, Short of the mountains. Clarks river which mouthes imedeately opposit to me forks at about 18 or 20 miles, the West fork runs to the Mt Hood and the main branch Runs from S. E.    after Capt Lewis Came up we proceeded on through a open ruged plain about 8 miles to a Village of 6 Houses on the river.    here we observed our 2 Canoes passing up on the opposit Side and the Wind too high for them to join us. I halted at the mouth of a run above the village near Some good grass to let the horses graze and for the party to dine. Sent to the huts and purchased a dog & Some wood.    dureing the time the party was takeing diner we purchased one horse.    after we proceeded on up the river about 4 miles to a village of 7 mat Lodges.    here our Chopunnish guide informed me that the next villg. was at Some distance and that we Could not get to it to night, and that there was no wood to be precured on this Side.    a man offered to Sell us a horse for a Canoe.    just at the moment we discovered one of our Canoes on the opposit Side.    we concluded to Camp here all night with the expectation of precureing some horses. Sent and purchased Some wood and 4 dogs <with> & Shapillele. Shabono purchased a hors for which he gave a red rapper, Shirt, ploom & Tomahawk &c.    the party purchased a great quantity of Chapellell and Some berries for which they gave bits of Tin and Small pieces of Cloth & wire &c.    had our horses led out and held to grass untill dusk when they were all brought to Camp, and pickets drove in the ground and the horses tied up.    we find the horses very troublesom perticularly the Stud which Compose 10/13 of our number of horses.    the air I find extreemly Cold which blows Continularly from Mt. Hoods Snowey regions.    those Indians reside in Small Lodges built of the mats of Grass, flags &c. and Crouded with inhabitents, who Speak a language Somewhat different from those at the falls.    their dress habits and appearance appear to be very much the Same with those below.    we made 14 miles to day with the greatest exirtion. Serjt. Gass & R. Fields joined us with one Canoe this evening.    the other Canoe with Colter & pots is a head.

Ordway
Tuesday 22nd of April 1806.    a clear pleasant cold morning.    we loaded up our horses & Set out.    assended a high hill    one of the horses threw his load & Scattered it    one of the Indians Stole a robe & hid it in one of their lodges.    we found it & proced on the high Smooth plain which is extensive & Smooth back from the river    about noon we halted at a village of the Wal-a-wal tribe where we bought a dog and a little firewood.    the wind So high from the N. W. that the canoes being on the opposite Side of the river could not cross    we purchased a horse.    took a light dinner and proceed. on about 6 miles and Camped at a village where we purchased a horse 5 dogs and a little wood and considerable of new chappalell &c.    in the evening Sergt. Gass & R. Fields came across the river & joined us with one of the Small canoes


GassTuesday 22nd.    This was a pleasant morning and high wind. We proceeded on about 3 miles, when the wind became so violent, that we could not proceed any further, and halted an unloaded our canoes. Having remained here two hours, the other canoe came up, and we proceeded on though the wind was high and river rough. At sunset I crossed over, where the party going by the land came in sight, and halted at a small village on the north side but the other canoe kept on along the southern shore. In the course of this day two more horses were procured, and at this small village 
we got some more dogs and shapaleel.



The hill on which Clark made his survey may have been Haystack Butte, Klickitat County, Washington, directly opposite Deschutes (Towarnihiooks, Clark's) River. Atlas map 77.Perhaps the Metolius River, in Jefferson County, Oregon, a tributary of the Deschutes.In Klickitat County, in the vicinity of present Maryhill Museum. Atlas map 77.In Klickitat County, in the vicinity of present John Day Dam, the camp for the night. Atlas map 77 shows two camps for this date. The first is noted as "encampd. 22d April 1806," while the second, a short distance upriver, is listed as "Campd. 22d April 1806."In it were Gass and Reubin Field, according to Ordway, and Clark.Perhaps Harley Canyon in Klickitat County. It does not appear on Atlas map 77.The textile plants used most commonly for weaving of large mats were bulrush, Scirpus sp. (perhaps Clark's grass), and common cat-tail ("flag"), Typha latifolia L. Hitchcock et al. 1:731.Clark is probably here referring to a dialect difference within the Shahaptian language.In Klickitat County, Washington, in the vicinity of Maryhill Museum. It was at a village
of Tenino Indians (called "Eneshur" by the captains) and not Walula Indians as Ordway seems to indicate.In the vicinity of John Day Dam, Klickitat County.A Tenino Indian village in Klickitat County, Washington, in the vicinity of John Day
Dam, where they camped for the night.In it were Colter and Potts; Reubin Field was in the same canoe with Gass. See journal 
entries of the captains and of Ordway for this day.