September 18, 1806ClarkThursday 18th of September 1806
we rose early    Capt McClellin wrote a letter and we took our leave, and proceeded on    passed the Grand river at 7 A M.    a Short distance below we came up with our hunters, they had killed nothing.    at 10 oClock we Came too and gathered pottows to eate    we have nothing but a fiew Buisquit to eate and are partly compelled to eate poppows which we find in great quantities on the Shores, the weather we found excessively hot as usial.    the lands fine particularly the bottoms.    a charming Oake bottom on the S E Side of the Missouri above the 2 Charletons rivers we find the Current of this part of the Missouri much more jentle than it was as we assended, the water is now low and where it is much confin'd    it is rapid.    we saw very little appearance of deer, Saw one bear at a distance and 3 turkeys only to day.    our party    entirely out of provisions Subsisting on poppaws.    we divide the buiskit which amount to nearly one buisket per man, this in addition to the poppaws is to last is down to the Settlement's which is 150 miles    the party appear perfectly contented and tell us that they can live very well on the pappaws.    we made 52 miles to day only.    one of our party J. Potts complains very much of one of his eyes which is burnt by the Sun from exposeing his face without a cover from the Sun. Shannon also complains of his face & eyes &c. Encamped on an Island nearly opposit to the enterance of Mine river.Ordway
Thursday 18th Sept. 1806.    a clear morning.    we gave Mr. McLanen a kegg of corn.    took our leave of him & his party and Set out early and proceeded on    Soon passd. the Mouth of Grand river. Soon after we overtook our hunters    they had killed nothing So we procd. on all day without detaining to hunt    Saw a fiew Turkeys    gathered Some pappaws which the party in general are fond of.    in the evening we Camped on an Island.—


GassThursday 18th.    We gave Mr. M'Clanen a keg of corn; took our leave of him and proceeded on. In a short time, passed the mouth of the river Grand, and soon after overtook the hunters, who had not killed any thing. We continued our voyage all day without waiting to hunt; gathering some papaws on the shores, and in the evening encamped on an island.


The Chariton River meets the Missouri in Chariton County, Missouri; the party first passed it on June 10, 1804. MRC map 10.The party first passed Lamine River on June 8, 1804; it joins the Missouri in Cooper County, Missouri, a few miles above Booneville. MRC map 9.Grand River now meets the Missouri between Carroll and Chariton counties, Missouri; 
the mouth may have been further upriver in 1806.