December 28, 1805ClarkDecember 28th Saturday 1805
rained as usial, a great part of the last night, and this morning rained and the wind blew hard from the S. E. Sent out the hunters and Salt makers, & employed the baleanc of the men Carrying the Pickets &c. &c. <The 2> hunters Sent out yesterday returned, haveing killed one deer near the Sea cost, my boy york verry unwell from violent Colds & Strains Carrying in meet and lifting logs on the huts to build them, This day is worm, and rained all day moderately without intermition.
ClarkSaturday the 28th December 1805
rained as usial the greater part of the last night and a continuation this morning accompanied with wind from the S East    Derected Drewyer, Shannon, Labeash, Reuben Field, and Collins to hunt; Jos. Fields, Bratten, Gibson to proceed to the Ocean at Some convenient place form a Camp and Commence makeing Salt with 5 of the largest Kittles, and Willard and Wiser to assist them in Carrying the Kittles to the Sea Coast— all the other men to be employed about putting up picketes & makeing the gates of the fort.    Y. [York] verry unwell from a violent Coald and Strain by Carrying meet from the woods and lifting the heavy logs on the works &c.    rained all Day without intermition.    the Weather verry worm.
Ordway
Saturday 28th Decr. 1805.—    the Savages Stayed at the fort all last night and informed us that a verry large fish was drove to Shore on the coast and that their women wer packing the oil and meat.    our offi    Capt. Lewis and three men got ready to go with a canoe to See the whail as we expect it is, but the wind and Storm arose So high that they could not go    five men Set out by land with kittles to go over to the Sea coast to form a Camp and make Some Salt.    three men went across the River a hunting    in the evening 2 hunters returned    had killd. one Deer.—


Whitehouse
Saturday decemr. 28th    This morning it rained & the wind was so high, that it prevented us from going to see the Whale.    Five of our Men went out & took kettles with them in Order to go over to the Sea coast to build a Camp & make Salt.    Three of our hunters were sent across the River to hunt.    In the Evening two hunters that were out returned with One deer 
which they had killed.—The saltmaking camp was established at present Seaside, Clatsop County, Oregon. It operated until February 21, 1806, and produced about three or four bushels of salt. The personnel varied at the site, but usually about three men were present. Appleman (LC), 196–97, 349, 351; Atlas map 84. Clatsop Indians inhabited winter villages at Seaside, moving from their summer villages around Point Adams to this area in the fall. Archaeological investigations in the Seaside area have mainly been conducted at two villages. The Palmrose site was inhabited from approximately 2,700 to 1,700 years ago; occupation apparently then shifted to the nearby Par-tee site which was inhabited from approximately 1,700 to 1,000 years ago. Both sites contained abundant artifacts and faunal remains reflecting the littoral adaptation of the prehistoric inhabitants of the northern Oregon coast. Minor (ASCR), 59; Phebus & Drucker.Joseph Field, Bratton, and Gibson were accompanied by temporary hands Willard and Weiser to set up a saltmaking camp at Seaside, Clatsop County, Oregon. It operated until February 21, 1806, under varying personnel.Clark names five men hunting this day: Drouillard, Shannon, Labiche, Reubin Field, 
and Collins.Clark names Joseph Field, Bratton, Gibson, Willard, and Weiser as going to the saltmaking camp at Seaside, Clatsop County, Oregon.Clark gives the names of the day's hunters as Drouillard, Shannon, Labiche, Reubin Field, and Collins.