September 15, 1806ClarkMonday 15th of September 1806
we set out early with a Stiff Breeze a head    saw Several deer Swiming the river soon after we Set out.    at 11 A. M. passed the enterance of the Kanzas river which was very low, about a mile below we landed and Capt Lewis and my Self assended a hill which appeared to have a Commanding Situation for a fort, the Shore is bold and rocky imediately at the foot of the hill, from the top of the hill you have a perfect Command of the river, this hill fronts the Kanzas and has a view of the Missouri a Short distance above that river.    we landed one time only to let the men geather Pappaws or the Custard apple of which this Country abounds, and the men are very fond of.    we discovered a Buck Elk on a Small Island, and sent the 2 fields and Shannon in pursute of it    they Soon Came up with and killed the Elk, he was large and in fine order we had his flesh Secured and divided.    as the winds were unfabourable the greater part of the day we only decended 49 Miles and encamped a Short distance Above Hay Cabin Creek.    we are not tormented by the Musquetors in this lower portion of the river, as we were above the river plat and as high up as the Rochejhone and for a fiew miles up that river, and above its' enterance into the Missouri.    we passd Some of the most Charming bottom lands to day and the uplands by no means bad, all well timberd.    the weather disagreeably worm and if it was not for the constant winds which blow from the S. and S E. we Should be almost Suficated Comeing out of a northern Country open and Cool between the Latd. of 46° and 49° North in which we had been for nearly two years, rapidly decending into a woody Country in a wormer Climate between the Latds. 38° & 39° North is probably the Cause of our experiencing the heat much more Senceable than those who have Continued within the parralel of Latitude.
Ordway
Monday 15th Sept 1806.    a fair morning.    we Set off at eight and procd. on    the wind a head as usal.    our hunters shot a buck Elk from their canoe on the lower point of an Isld. and was fat.    we took the meat on board and procd. on    towards evening the hunters Shot a buck from their canoe.    we have seen about 20 deer on the shores this day    we Camped at Sunset on N. Side an emence Site of pappaws & as the men were gathering them Saw a number of rattle Snakes and killed one of them and saved the skin.


GassMonday 15th.    The morning was pleasant and we embarked early. In a short time we killed a fine large elk; at 11 o'clock passed the Kanzon river, and encamped at sun set.

The Kansas River was first reached on June 26, 1804; it joins the Missouri in Wyandotte County, Kansas. MRC map 14.The hill would be in downtown Kansas City, in Jackson County, Missouri. MRC map 14.As on other occasions on this downriver journey, Clark does not indicate which side of the river the camp was on; it would be in either Jackson or Clay County, Missouri. However, Ordway says the camp was on the north side, so it would be in Clay County. "Hay Cabin Creek," first passed on June 24, 1804, is the present Little Blue River in Jackson County. MRC map 13.