July 14, 1804ClarkCourse Distance and Reffurrence July 14th 1804N 70° W.2ms. to a pt. on S. S. pass an Isld. Small on S. S.    (1) a violent
Storm from N. EN. 20° W.2ms. to a pt. on L. S.    wind from N. W. by N.N. 30° W1me. on the L. S.N. 50° W2 ½ms. to the Lower point of an IslandN. 87 W.1 ½to a second point of same Island on Lad. side of the same
<below> a little above the lower point of this island a creek
falls in on the Stard. called by the Maha Neesh-nah-ba-
to-na—    this is a considerable creek    is as large as the
mine river, and runs parallel with the Missouri through
much the greater portin of it's course 9 July the 14th Satturday    Some hard Shours of rain accompaned with Some wind detained us untill about 7 oClock, we then Set out and proceeded on about a mile a[nd] th atmispeir became Suddenly darkened by a blak & dismal looking Cloud, we wer in a Situation, near the upper point of a Sd. Isd. & the opsd Shore falling in    in this Situation a Violent Storm of Wint from the N, E    (passing over an Open plain, Struck the boat nearly <broad Side> Starboard, quatering, & blowing down the Current)    the exerssions of all our Men who were out in an instant, aded to a Strong Cable and Anchor was Scrcely Sufficent to Keep the boat from being thrown up on the Sand Island, and dashed to peices    the Waves dasthed over on the Side next to the wind    the lockers which was covered with Tarpoling prevented the[m] coming into the boat untill the Boat was Creaned [careened] on the Side from the Wind    in this Situation we continued about 40 minits, the two perogues about a quater of a mile above, one of them in a Similer Situation with the Boat, the other under the charge of George Gibson in a much better position, with her Ster[n] faceing the wind, this Storm Suddenly Seased, & 1 minit the river was as Smoth as glass, the wind Shifted to the S. E and we Set Sail, and proceeded on    passed (1) a Small Island on the S. S. and Dined—    R: Fields who has charge of the horses &c. on Shore did not join us last night—.    passed a old fort where Mr. Bennet, of St Louis winttered 2 years & traded with the Otteaus & Panies    on the S. S. 1 me. abov the little Island, I went out on the L. S. and observed two Elk on a Iand in the river, in attempting to get near those elk obseved one near us    I Shot one.    continued on Shore & thro the bottom which was extensive, Some Small Praries, and a peponce [preponderance] of high rich & well timbered bottom, in the Glades I saw wild Timothy, Lams quarter Cuckle bur & rich weed, on the edges Plumbs of different kinds Grapes, and Goose berries, Camped on the L. S.    Ruben Fields and Gulrich [Goodrich] joined the Party    two men unwell, one a Felin on his finger, river fallClarkJuly 14th, Satturday 1804
Some hard Showers or rain this morning prevented our Setting out untill 7 oClock, at half past Seven, the atmispr. became Sudenly darkened by a black and dismal looking Cloud, at the time we were in a Situation (not to be bettered) near the upper point of the Sand Island, on which we lay, and the opposit Shore, the bank was falling in and lined with Snags as far as we could See down,—.    in this Situation The Storm which passd over an open Plain from the N. E. Struck the our boat on the Starbd. quarter, and would have thrown her up on the Sand Island dashed to peces in an Instant, had not the party leeped out on the Leward Side and kept her off with the assistance of the ancker & Cable, untill the Storm was over, the waves Dashed over her windward Side and She must have filled with water if the Lockers which is covered with Tarpoling & <prevented> Threw of the water & prevented any quantity Getting into Bilge of the Boat
In this Situation we continued about 40 Minits. when the Storm Sudenly Seased and the river become Instancetaniously as Smoth as Glass.
The two perogus dureing this Storm was in a Similar Situation with the boat about half a mile above—    The wind Shifted to the S. E & We Saled up    passed a Small (1) Isld. Situated on the S. S. and Dined & Continud two hours, men examine their arms—    about a Mile above this Island, passed a Small Tradeing fort on the S. S. where, , François M.">Mr. Bennet of St. Louis Traded with the Otteaus & Panies two years. I went on Shore to Shoot Some Elk on a Sand bar to the L. S. I fired at one but did not get him, went out into a large extensive bottom the greater part of which overflows, the part that does not overflow, is rich and well timbered, Some Small open Praries near the hills, the Boat passed the lower part of a large Island Situated on the S. S.    above the Lower point of this Island on the S. S. a (2) large Creek coms into the river Called by the Maha's [NB: Mahar] Indians Neesh-nah-ba-to-na 50 yds [NB: Neĕsh-năh bă tē na]    this is a considerable Creek nearly as large as the Mine River, and runs parrelel with the Missouri, the Greater part of its Course. In those Small Praries or glades I saw wild Timothey, lambs-quarter, Cuckle burs; & rich weed.    on the edges Grows Sumr. Grapes, Plum's, & Gooseberries. I Joined the boat which had Came to and Camped in a bend opposd. the large Island before mentioned on the L. S.    Several men unwell with Boils, Felns, &c.    The river falls a little.Course Distance & Refferse July 14th
N. 70° W.2ms. to a point on S. S.    a Sml. Isd. S. S. (1)N. 20° W2Ms. to a pt. L. S.    wind Shift N. W. by N.N. 30° W.1me. on the L. S.N. 50 W2 ½Ms. to Low pt. of an Isd. S. S.N. 87 W1 ½Ms. to a pt. on S. Side of Isd.    psd. a Creek (2) 9 OrdwaySaturday July 14th 1804, Some hard Showers of rain accompanied with some wind which detained us untill about 7 oClock, we then Set out and proceeded on about a mile    then their came up a violent Storm from the N. E. of wind & rain which passed through an open prarie, it came So Suddenly by a black cloud & dismal looking.    we were in a Situation near the upper point of a Sand Island & on the opposite Shore falling in, the boat nearly quartering & blowing down the current.    the Boat was in danger of being thrown up of the Sand but the men were all out in an Instant holding hir out Stemming the wind    the anchor was immediately carried out. So by all exertion we could make we kept the boat from filling or takeing injury.    the 2 pearogues ware about a quarter of a mile ahead    the men on board
were much put to it to keep them Safe.    this Storm Suddenly Seased, and in one minute the River was as Smooth as it was before, the wind Shifted to the S. E. and we Set Sail & proceded on    passed small Island on the north Side & dined. R. Field who had charge of the horses on Shore did not join us last night.—    passed an old fort on the north Side, Where Bennet of St. Louis wintered 2 years & traded with the Zotteaus & paunies.    proceeded on    passed a handsome Sand beach on the South Side, where we Saw three large Elk the first wild ones I ever Saw. Capt. Clark & drewyer Shot at them, but the distance was too long, they Ran or trotted in to the River and Seamon <cross> Swam across after them, we proceeded on    passed a large Creek behind the lower point of an Island on the North Side called Neash-na-Batto-na, this Creek is as large as the Mine River & runs parrelel with the Missouris for Some considerable distance, the men who were with the horses joined us this evening. Capt. Clarks notes & Remarks of 2 days blew Overboard this morning in the Storm, and he was much put to it to Recolect the courses &.C.—    we Camped on the South Side opposite an Island.Floyd

Saturday July 14th 1804    Set out at day Lite    Came one mile and ½    Came a Dredfulle hard Storme from the South which Lasted for about one ouer and half which Cosed us to Jump out and hold hir    She Shipt about 2 Barrels of water    Came one mile    the wind fare Sailed, passed a Creek on the N Side Called Neeshba Creek    it is about 40 yards wide    the Land is Low    encamt on the Southe Side—


GassSaturday 14th.    At day break it began to rain and continued until seven when it abated, and we set forward: but in a short time a gust of wind and rain came on so violent, that all hands had to leap into the water to save the boat. Fortunately this storm did not last long, and we went on to a convenient place and landed. Here we continued two hours and then proceeded. We saw some elk, but could not kill any of them; passed a river on the north side, called Wash-ba-to-nan, and encamped on the south side.

Whitehouse
Saty 14    the Rain Came on before we left Camp with a Smart wind that Inragd the watter to Such a degree that all hands had to Get in the Watter to keep up the boat—    Roed on after the Storm was over 10 Miles
Saturday July 14th    This morning before we embarked a heavy Rain came on, with a hard wind; which occasioned the River to run in high Waves, & to so great a degree, that all hands had to get into the Water to keep up the boat.    The Storm abated about 10 oClock A. M. and we preceeded & encamp'd on the River bank distance come this day being 10 Miles
		  						   		
	
Clark here places his courses and distances ahead of the main entry for July 14 in the Field Notes, and he does so intermittently from here on. This edition follows his changing practice.This last course and distance notation appears to be largely in Lewis's hand.Evidently the boat was tilted on the beach so that the lower hull was toward the wind, preventing the waves from coming into the hull.Probably , François M. Benoit, who had engaged in the trade with the Osages for several years before the Louisiana Purchase, or possibly a relative. Benoit, was a partner of Manuel Lisa, and like Lisa, had somehow antagonized Lewis during the winter before the expedition set out, causing the captain to write, "Damn Manuel and triply Damn Mr. B." The post was in northwest Holt County, Missouri. Osgood (FN), 62 n. 8; Nasatir (BLC), 2:677–80; Lewis to Clark, May 6, 1804, Jackson (LLC), 1:180 and n. 2; MRC map 20."Lams quarter" is Chenopodium album L., lamb's quarters, and "cuckle bur" is Xanthium strumarium L., cocklebur. Steyermark, 611–12; Gilmore, 26; Fernald, 1473.The camp would be on the Nebraska side, near the Nemaha-Richardson county line. On the opposit shore the same line divides Atchison and Holt counties, Missouri. MRC map 20; MRR map 56.According to Thomas Say, "nish-na-bot-ona" (today's Nishnabotna) is an Oto Indian name signifying "canoe making river." Evidently its mouth in 1804 was many miles farther down the Missouri River than at present. The party probably passed the mouth near the present Atchison-Holt county line. Thwaites (EWT), 27:300; Nicollet (MMR), 379; MRC map 20; MRR maps 56, 58.Summer grape is probably Vitis aestivalis Michx., summer grape, pigeon grape. The specification of "summer" grape instead of other Vitis species is noteworthy. Summer grape is distinguished from other grape species by the white to silver underside of the leaves. It may be confused with V. cinerea Engelm., grayback grape, which also has lighter undersides of leaves and also occurs in the area. Fernald, 997; Steyermark, 1036–37; Barkley, 219.Probably Benoit again, who traded with Oto and Pawnee Indians.Cervus elaphus.Lewis's Newfoundland dog Seaman.Nishnabotna River, Atchison County, Missouri; it now mouths farther upstream.