November 9, 1805ClarkNovr. 9th Saturday 1805
The tide of last night obliged us to unload all the Canoes one of which Sunk before She was unloaded by the high waves or Swells which accompanied the returning tide, The others we unloaded, and 3 others was filled with water Soon after by the Swells or high Sees which broke against the Shore imediately where we lay, rained hard all the fore part of the day, the [tide] which rose untill 2 oClock P M to day brought with it Such emence Swells or waves, added to a hard wind from the <S W> South which Loosened the Drift trees which is verry thick on the Shores, and tossed them about in Such a manner, as to endanger our Canoes very much, with every exertion and the Strictest attention by the party was Scercely Suffient to defend our Canoes from being Crushed to pieces between those emensely large trees maney of them 200 feet long and 4 feet through. The tide of this day rose about [blank] feet & 15 Inches higher than yesterday    this is owing to the wind which Sets in from the ocian, we are Compelled to move our Camp from the water, as also the loading every man as wet all the last night and this day as the rain Could make them which Contind. all day.    at 4 oClock the wind Shifted about to the S. W imediately from the ocian and blew a Storm for about 2 hours, raised the tide verry high all wet & cold    Labiech killed 4 Ducks very fat & R. Fields Saw Elk Sign.
not withstanding the disagreeable time of the party for Several days past they are all Chearfull and full of anxiety to See further into the ocian.    the water is too Salt to Drink, we use rain water. The Salt water has acted on some of the party already as a Pergitive.    rain continus.
ClarkNovember 9th Saturday 1805
The tide of last night did not rise Sufficintly high to come into our camp, but the Canoes which was exposed to the mercy of the waves &c. which accompanied the returning tide, they all filled, and with great attention we Saved them untill the tide left them dry—    wind Hard from the South and rained hard all the fore part of the day, at 2 oClock P M the flood tide came in accompanied with emence waves and heavy winds, floated the trees and Drift which was on the point on which we Camped and tosed them about in Such a manner as to endanger the Canoes verry much, with every exertion and the Strictest attention by every individual of the party was Scercely Sufficient to Save our Canoes from being crushed by those monsterous trees maney of them nearly 200 feet long and from 4 to 7 feet through.    our camp entirely under water dureing the hight of the tide, every man as wet as water could make them all the last night and to day all day as the rain Continued all day, at 4 oClock P M the wind Shifted about to the S. W. and blew with great violence imediately from the Ocian for about two hours, notwithstanding the disagreeable Situation of our party all wet and Cold (and one which they have experienced for Several days past) they are chearfull and anxious to See further into the Ocian, The water of the river being too Salt to use we are obliged to make use of rain water—    Some of the party not accustomed to Salt water has made too free a use of it on them it acts as pergitive.
at this dismal point we must Spend another night as the wind & waves are too high to proceed.

Ordway
Saturday 9th Nov. 1805.    rained hard the greater part of last night, and the wind rose so high N. W that we had to unload the canoes in the night.    this morning wet    rained the most of the day and the wind So high up the River that Caused the tide to raise much higher than common So we had to moove our loads and Some of the Camps further from Shore. Some of the party killed Several ducks in the course of the day.—

GassSaturday 9th.    The morning was windy, rainy and disagreeable, and we were obliged to remain at Cape Swell all day, and unload our canoes to prevent them from sinking; notwithstanding some of them did sink when the tide came in at noon. We had no fresh water, except what rain we caught by putting out our vessels. We remained here all night, and the rain continued.

Whitehouse
Saturday Novemr 9th    It rained the greater part of last night, & the Wind blew very hard from the So. East, which caused the Waves to run so very high, that all hands were employed before day light this morning, in unloading 
the Canoes to keep them from sinking.    The morning we had wet weather & rainey, & it rained the most part of this day.—    The wind continued high, which caused the tide to rise, much higher than at common tides.    this obliged us to remove our Camp & the baggage &ca to a place some small distance from the River, some of our Men went out and killed several ducks.    it ceased raining in the evening.—

