November 26, 1805ClarkNovember 26th Tuesday 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning at daylight wind blew from the E N. E, we Set out and proceeded on up on the North Side of this great river to a rock in the river from thence we Crossed to the lower point of an [blank] Island    passed between 2 Islands to the main Shore, and proceeded down the South Side, passed 2 Inlets & halted below the 2d at a Indian village of 9 large houses—    those Indians live on an emenence behind a Island or a Channel of the river not more than 300 yds wide, they live on fish & Elk and Wapto roots, of which we bought a few at a high price    they Call them Selves Cat-tar-bets    description
We proceeded on about 8 miles and Encamped in a deep bend to the South, we had not been Encamped long ere 3 Indians Came in a Canoe to trade the Wapto roots—    we had rain all the day    all wet and disagreeable    a bad place to Camp  all around this great bend is high land thickly timbered brushey & almost impossible to penetrate    we Saw on an Island below the village a place of deposit for the dead in Canoes—
Great numbers of Swan Geese Brant Ducks & Gulls in this great bend which is Crouded with low Islands covered with weeds grass &c. and overflowed every flood tide    The people of the last village is—[blank]
they ask emence prices for what they have to Sel    Blue Beeds is their great trade    they are fond of Clothes or blankits of Blue red or brown
We are now decending to see if a favourable place should offer on the So Side to winter &c.
from a high Point opsd. a high Isd down the South Side is S. 30° W 6 mls to a point of low land opsd. upr. pt of Isd.    passed lowr. pt. 1st Isd. marshey.    at the upr. pt. of 2 low Isd. opsd. each other at 4 milesS. 12° E2miles to an Indn. Cat-tar-bet vilg of 9 houses    passed an inlet
300 yds wide on Std at ½ a mileS. 60° W1mile to high land on the SouthS. 70° W1do.    to a South point Low land    a low Isd. opsd.    pass the
formerS. 50° W.6miles to a high point S.South2miles to a bend CampedN. 70° W.6miles to a point No. 1 a deep bend to the leftS. 50° W8miles to Point No. 2 passing a deep bend to the SouthS. 50° W1 ½milesS. 40 W1 ½miles to Pt in BayFrom the Peninsolu to the upper point isN. 65° E—To Point [blank miles across the river isN. 25° W 4 miles—from Pt. No. 2 to Cape DisapointmtN. 70° WTo point Adams isWestTo 1st Creek Small above AdamsS. 60 W.To 2nd Creek    do    doS. 40 Wto 3d    do    do    doS. 20 W.To Fort River is imedeately cross S10° ETo the opening of the mouth of RiverS. 50 E
The bay turns to the N of East & recves 2 other small Brooks
ClarkTuesday 26th November 1805
Cloudy and Some rain this morning from 6 oClock.    wind from the E. N. E, we Set out out early and crossed a Short distance above the rock out in the river, & between Some low marshey Islands to the South Side of the Columbia at a low bottom about 3 miles below Point Samuel and proceeded near the South Side leaveing the Seal Islands to our right and a marshey bottom to the left 5 Miles to the Calt-har-mar [NB: Cathlahma] Village of 9 large wood houses on a handsom elivated Situation near the foot of a Spur of the high land behind a large low Island Seperated from the Southerly Shore by a Chanel of about 200 yards Wide, This nation appear to differ verry little either in language, Customs dress or appearance from the Chin nooks & War-ci â cum live principally on fish and pap-pato    they have also other roots, and Some Elk meat.
We purchased Some green fish, & wap pa to for which we gave Imoderate pricie's.    after dining on the fresh fish which we purchased, we proceeded on through a Deep bend to the South and encamped under a high hill, where we found much difficuelty in precureing wood to burn, as it was raining hard, as it had been the greater part of the day.    Soon after we encamped 3 Indians of the last town Came in a Canoe with wap-pato roots to Sell to us    Some of which we purchased with fish hooks— from the Village quite around this bend to the West the land is high and thickly timbered with pine balsom &c.    a Short distance below the Calt har mer Village on the Island which is Opposit I observed Several Canoes Scaffold in which Contained their dead, as I did not examine this mode of deposing the dead, must refer it to a discription hereafter.
Ordway
Tuesday 26th Nov. 1805.    a Cloudy wet morning.    we Set out eairly    went about one mile then crossed the River and went down along the South Shore    passed Several Islands, halted at a village of the Clotsop nation.    they gave us pleanty to eat and appeared verry friendly.    we bought a fiew wapatoes roots, &C    the day rainy and cold.    we went on    passd. Several low marshey Islands which was covred with course grass, and willows    the Shore is high land covred thick with pine timber and under brush.    we Campd in a thick part of wood


GassTuesday 26th.    The morning of this day was cloudy and wet; but we set out early, west about a mile, and then crossed the river; passing in our way several islands. Immediately after we crossed, we came to a small village of the natives, and procured a few roots, called Wapto, from them, and then proceeded on, coasting down the bay on the south side. The whole of the day was wet and unpleasant, and in the evening, we encamped for the night.


Whitehouse
Tuesday Novemr. 26th    A cloudy wet morning, & we set out early.    we proceeded about 1 Mile up the River & then crossed it.    In doing of which we passed through several Islands.    We proceeded on down the South side of the River, & came to an Inhabited Village of Indians.    We halted at this place for a short time; where the Indians gave us plenty to eat consisting of Roots not unlike potatoes & behaved friendly to us.—    They also gave us a few of these Roots or wild potatoes to take with us.    We continued on still down the River; the day being wet, cold and very disagreeable.    We encamped in a thicket on the South shore.    Several Indians came to us in a Canoe, with Roots to sell.    We saw along the shore, a number of Islands that lay very low & marshy.    The Geese, swan & Ducks are in the greatest plenty at this place, & our Hunters killed a number of them.    We purchased the Roots the Indians had brought with them in the Canoe, and they left us well pleased.—



These islands (called "Seal Islands" in second entry and on Atlas map 82) in Clatsop County, Oregon, are now within the Lewis and Clark National Wildlife Refuge. Atlas maps 82, 89.For the Cathlamets see above, November 11, 1805. The village of "9 large houses" is shown on Atlas maps 82, 92; it was named Hlilusqahih and was located at the present town of Knappa, Clatsop County. Archaeological excavations at this site uncovered house remains and artifacts relating to the Cathlamet occupation in the early historic period. Curtis, 8:182; Minor (ASCR).In Clatsop County, near present Svenson. Atlas maps 82, 92.A page of bearings and distances interrupts the narrative here in the Elkskin-bound Journal; it may have been written first and the day's narrative written around it later. It has now been placed at the end of the text.Apparently the asterisk at the end of this line refers to two courses in the left margin, at right angles to the rest of page. They have been placed after this course.Probably the river on which they built Fort Clatsop, "Netul River" in later entries, today's Lewis and Clark River, Clatsop County. Atlas map 84.Present Cathlamet Point, Clatsop County. Coues (HLC), 2:721 n. 3, suggests that the captains may have named it for Samuel Lewis, the copyist of Clark's 1814 map, Atlas map 126, who he conjectures might have been a relative of Meriwether Lewis. In Clark'sEstimated Distances it seems to be "Point Samuel g—." Atlas maps 81, 82, 92. The word here appears as if it could have ben added to a blank space.The Indians were Cathlamets, living along the south shore of the Columbia River; see Clark's entry for November 11.In Clatsop County, Oregon, near Svenson.The people were Cathlamets, speaking Kathlamet, a Chinookan language, and their village was at Knappa, Clatsop County, Oregon.In Clatsop County, near Svenson.The people were Cathlamets, speaking Kathlamet, a Chinookan language, and their village was at Knappa, Clatsop County, Oregon.In Clatsop County, near Svenson.