March 16, 1806LewisSunday March 16th 1806.
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and party did not return from the Cathlahmahs this evening as we expected. we suppose he was detained by the hard winds of today.    the Indians remained with us all day, but would not dispose of their canoes at a price which it was in our power to give consistently with the state of our Stock of Merchandize.    two handkerchiefs would now contain all the small articles of merchandize which we possess; the ballance of the stock consists of 6 blue robes one scarlet do. one uniform artillerist's coat and hat, five robes made of our large flag, and a few old cloaths trimed with ribbon.    on this stock we have wholy to depend for the purchase of horses and such portion of our subsistence from the Indians as it will be in our powers to obtain.    a scant dependence indeed, for a tour of the distance of that before us.    the Clam of this coast are very small.    the shell consists of two valves which open with a hinge.    the shell is smooth thin of an oval form or like that of the common mussle, and sky blue colour.    it is about 1½ inches in length, and hangs in clusters to the moss of the rocks.    the natives sometimes eat them.    the perewinkle both of the river and Ocean are similar to those found in the same situations on the Atlantic coast.    the common mussle of the river are also the same with those in the rivers of the atlantic coast.    the cockle is small and also much the same of the Atlantic.    there is also an animal which inhabits a shell perfectly circular about 3 Inches in diameter, thin and entire on the margin, convex and smooth on the upper side, plain on the under part and covered with a number minute capillary fibers by means of which it attatches itself to the sides of the rocks.    the shell is thin and consists of one valve.    a small circular apperture is formed in the center of the under shell.    the animal is soft & boneless.—
The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the great falls of the Columbia has now made it's appearance in the creeks near this place.    one of them was brought us today by an Indian who had just taken it with his gig.    this is a likness of it; it was 2 feet 8 Inches long, and weighed 10 lbs.    the eye is moderately large, the puple black and iris of a silvery white with a small addmixture of yellow, and is a little terbid near it's border with a yellowish brown.    the position of the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in proportion to the fish.    the fins are boney but not pointed except the tail and back fins which are a little so,    the prime back fin and ventral ones, contain each ten rays; those of the gills thirteen, that of the tail twelve, and the small fin placed near the tail above has no bony rays, but is a tough flexable substance covered with smooth skin.    it is thicker in proportion to it's width than the salmon.    the tongu is thick and firm beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a single series.    the teeth of the mouth are as before discribed.    neither this fish nor the salmon are caught with the hook, nor do I know on what they feed.—
ClarkSunday March 16th 1806
Not any occurrence worthy of relation took place today. Drewyer and party did not return from the Cath lah mah's this evening as we expected. we Suppose he was detained by the hard winds today.    the Indians remain with us all day, but would not dispose of their Canoe at a price which it was in our power to give consistently with the State of our Stock of Merchandize. One handkerchief would contain all the Small articles of merchandize which we possess, the ballance of the Stock Consists of 6 Small blue robes or Blankets one of Scarlet.    one uniform Artillerist's Coat and hat, 5 robes made of our larg flag, and a fiew our old Clothes trimed with ribon.    on this Stock we have wholy to depend for the purchase of horses and Such portion of our Subsistence from the Indians as it will be in our power to obtain.    a scant dependence indeed for the tour of the distance of that before us.
The pellucid jelly like Substance, called the Sea nettle I found in great abundance along the Strand where it has been thrown up by the waves and tide, and adheres to the Sand.
There are two Species of the Fuci, or (Seawead) Seawreck which we also found thrown up by the waves.    the 1st Specie at one extremity consists of a large sesicle or hollow vessale which would contain from one to 2 gallons, of a conic form, the base of which forms the extreem End and is convex and Globelar bearing on its center Some Short broad and irregular fibers.    the Substance is about the consistancy of the rind of a citron Mellon and ¾ of an inch thick, yellow celindrick, and regularly tapering the tube extends to 20 or 30 feet and is then termonated with a number of branches which are flat ½ inch in width, rough particularly on the edges, where they are furnished with a number of little oval vesicles or bags of the size of a Pigions egg.    this plant Seams to be calculated to float at each extremity, while the little end of the tube from whence the branches proceed, lies deepest in the water.
The white Salmon Trout which we had previously seen only at the Great Falls of the Columbia, or a little below the Great Falls, has now made its appearance in the creeks near this place.    one of them was brought us to day by an indian who had just taken it with his gig. This is a likeness of it; it was 2 feet 8 inches long, and weighed ten pounds.    the eye is moderately large, the puple black with a Small admixture of yellow and the iris of a Silvery white with a Small admixture of yellow and a little tirbed near its border with a yellowish brown.    the position of the fins may be seen from the drawing, they are small in perpotion to the fish.    the fins are boney but not pointed except the tail and back fins which are a little So, the prime back fin and venteral ones, contain each ten rays; those of the gills twelve, and the Small finn placed near the tail above has no long rays, but is a tough flexable Substance covered with Smooth Skin.    it is thicker in perpotion to it's width than the Salmons.    the tongue is thick and firm beset on each border with small subulate teeth in a Single Series.    the Teeth of the mouth are as before discribed.    neither this fish nor the Salmon are cought with the hook, nor do I know on what they feed.—.—. now begin to run &c. &c.

Ordway
Sunday 16th March 1806.—    a rainy wet morning.    the Savages Stayed in the fort.    rained the greater part of the day.    nothing else Extraordinary.    our officers Sealed up some papers and letters for Mr Haily and gave them to the Savages


GassSunday 16th.    Last night it became cloudy and began to rain; and the rain has continued all day.— The Indians stayed about the fort the whole of this day. Yesterday while I was absent getting our meat home, one of the hunters killed two vultures, the largest fowls I had ever seen. I never saw any such as these except on the Columbia river and the seacoast.


Whitehouse
Sunday March 16th    A Rainey wet morning.    The party that went to the Cath-le-mah Village traded with the Natives.    The Men at the fort were employed in dressing Skins, making blanket Coats &ca.    nothing further extraordinary happen'd this day—



A red vertical line runs from beginning of the next sentence to near the end of the paragraph, perhaps done by Biddle.The coho salmon. Burroughs, 261.A sketch of the coho salmon from Lewis's Codex J, p. 133 (fig. 49).Identified by Coues (HLC), 3:897, as a jellyfish, perhaps Cyanea sp. There is also the possibility of Aurelia sp. or Velella sp.See Lewis's entry of March 17, 1805, next, where both species are described.A sketch of the coho salmon from Clark's Voorhis No. 2 (fig. 50).Perhaps the ship captain Samuel Hill; see November 11, 1805.Presumably California condors, but it is curious that the captains say nothing about 
these specimens on this date.Portions of the entries for this day and for March 19 and 20 appear to be in another hand.