October 13, 1804Clark13th of October Satturday 1804    Newmon Confined for Mutinous expressions,    proceeded on    passed a Camp of Sioux on the S. S.    those people did not Speak to us.    passed a Creek on the S. S. 18 miles above the Ricaras I call Stone Ido[l] Creek, this Creek heads in a Small lake at no great distance, near which there is a Stone to which the Indians asscribe great virtue &. &c.    at 21 Miles passed a Creek 15 yds wide on the L. S I call Pocasse, we observed great quantites of grapes, a fine Breez from S E    Camped on the L. S.    Some rain thus evening, we formed a Court Martial of 7 of our party to Try Newmon, they Senteenced him 75 Lashes and banishment from the party—    The river narrow current jentle & wood plenty on the Bottoms    the up land is as usial Open divircified plains, generally rich & leavel.
Course & DistanceN. 60° W.3m. to a pt on the S. S.N. 40° W.2m. to a point of timber on the L. S.N. 10° W.2m to a point on L. S.N. 53° W.1 ½m to a point on the S. S.North2m to a point on the L. S. opposit a Creek on the L. S.N. 18° E.3miles to the upper point of Some timber on the S. S. &
CampedClark13th Octr.Course distance & reffurenceN. 60° W.  3miles to a pt. on the S. S.N. 40 W.  2miles to a pt. of timber on L. SN. 10° W.  2miles to the pt. on the L. S.N. 53 W.  1 ½mes. to a pt. on the S. S.North  2mes. to a pt. on the L. S. opsit the mouth of a Creek on
the <L> S. S. (1)N. 70° W.  4 ½miles to a pt. on the S. S. passing a Island (2) and opsd. a
Creek L. S. (3) 5N. 18° E  3mes. to the upper point of some wood on the S. S. and
Camped 18 13th of October Satturday 1804
one man J. Newmon Confined for mutinous expression    Set out early proceeded on, passd. a Camp of Seauex on the S. S.    those people only viewed us & did not Speak one word—    The visiters of last evening all except one returned which is the Brother of the Chief we have on board passed (1) a Creek on the S. S. 13 yds. at 18 me. above the Town heading in Some Ponds a Short Diste. to the N. E we call Stone Idol C. (well to observe here that the Yankton or R Jacque heads at about 2 Days March of this place Easterly, the R de Seauex one Day further, the Chien [NB: Chayenne (the Chays formerly there] a branch of R. Rouche [NB: Rouge] Still beyend, and the River St. Peters 4 Days March from this place on the Same direction    Informtn. of the Rickores).    passed 2 large willow (2) & Sand Islands above the mouth of the last Creek—    at 21 miles above the Village passed a (3) Creek about 15 yards wide on the L. S. we Call after 2d Chief Pocasse (or Hay)    nearly opposit this creek a fiew miles from the river on the S. S. 2 Stones resembling humane persons & one resembling a Dog is Situated in the open Prarie, to those Stone the Rickores pay Great reverance make offerings [NB: (votive dress [or press?] &c] whenever they pass (Infomtn. of the Chief & Intepeter)    those people have a Curious Tredition of those Stones, one was a man in Love, one a Girl whose parents would not let marry, [NB: The man as is customary went off to mourn, the feamale followed.]    the Dog went to mourn with them    all turned to Stone gradually, Commenceing at the feet. Those people fed on grapes untill they turned, & the woman has a bunch of grapes yet in her hand    on the river near the place those are Said to be Situated, we obsd. a greater quantity of fine grapes than I ever Saw at one place.
The river about the Island on which the lower Rickores Village is Situated is narrow and Conts. a great propotion of Timber than below, the bottoms on both Sides is Covered with timber    the up lands naked    the Current jentle and Sand bars Confined to the points Generally
We proceeded on under a fine Breeze from the S.E. and Camped late at the upper part of Some wood on the <L> Starboard Side, Cold & Some rain this evening.    we Sent out hunters    Killed one Deer.
We Tried the Prisoner Newmon last night by 9 of his Peers they did "Centence him 75 Lashes & Disbanded the party."Lewis and ClarkOrders
13th of October 1804
A court Martial to Consist of nine members will set to day at 12 oClock for the trial of John Newman now under Confinement    Capt. Clark will attend to the forms & rules of a president without giveing his opinionDetail for the Court MartialSert. John OrdawaySergeant Pat. GassJo. ShieldsH. HallJo. CollinsWm. WernerWm. BrattenJo. Shannon<P Wiser>Silas GoodrichMeriwether Lewis Capt.
1st U' S. Regt. Infty.Wm Clark Capt
or [on?] E. N W D
In conformity to the above order the Court martial convened this day for the trial of John Newman, charged with "having uttered repeated expressions of a highly criminal and mutinous nature; the same having a tendency not only to distroy every principle of military discipline, but also to alienate the affections of the individuals composing this Detachment to their officers, and disaffect them to the service for which they have been so sacredly and solemnly engaged."—    The Prisonar plead not guilty to the charge exhibited against him. The court after having duly considered the evidence aduced, as well as the defense of the said prisonor, are unanimously of opinion that the prisonar John Newman is guilty of every part of the charge exhibited against him, and do sentence him <under the articles of the [blank] Section of the> agreeably to the rules and articles of war, to receive seventy five lashes on his bear back, and to be henceforth discarded from the perminent party engaged for North Western discovery; two thirds of the Court concurring in the sum and nature of the punishment awarded.    the commanding officers approve and confirm the sentence of the court, and direct the punishment take place tomorrow between the hours of one and two P. M.—    The commanding officers further direct that John Newman in future be attatched to the mess and crew of the red Perogue as a labouring hand on board the same, and that he be deprived of his arms and accoutrements, and not be permited the honor of mounting guard untill further orders; the commanding officers further direct that in lue of the guard duty from which Newman has been exempted by virtue of this order, that he shall be exposed to such drudgeries as they may think proper to direct from time to time with a view to the general relief of the detachment.—

OrdwaySaturday 13th Oct. Cloudy.    proceeded on    passed ">Pond River on N. S. about 50 yds. wide at the Mouth.    about 12 oClock it rained Some.    we halted    a court Martial was held which detained us 2 hours.    we then proceedd on.    passed Several Bottoms covered with C. W. Timber    the River Gits narrower & deeper than below    the hills make near the River on each Side.    at dark we Camped on N. S. jest abo. a Bottom of fine Timber,—


GassSaturday 13th.    We proceeded on early and had a cloudy day; passed ">Pond river on the north side, about 50 yards wide. One of the squaws went on with us. At 12 it rained some, and we halted to hold a court martial. At 2 continued our voyage, and did not get landing until after dark, the bank was so high and steep on one side and the water so shallow on the other. We encamped on the north side.


WhitehouseSaturday 13th Oct. 1804.    we Set off eairly clouday, about 12 oclock it rained some.    we halted 2 hours.    then proceeded on untill dark and camped on the N. S.
Saturday October 13th    We set out early this morning, the weather being Cloudy, we passed a River, called ">Pond River lying on the North side of the Mesouri.    it is 50 Yards wide at its mouth where one of the Rick a Ree Squaws we had on board the boat left us, three Indians still remain'd with us    at 12 oClock A. M. we had some Rain    we stopped with the Crafts for two hours, & then proceeded on till dark & Encamped on the North side of the River—



The incident may actually have occurred on October 12, since Ordway notes Newman's confinement in his entry for that day. He also notes that Moses B. Reed, the erstwhile deserter, was confined at the same time. No other record or journal mentions Reed's connection with the affair, and there is no indication of what his offence was. See sketches of Reed and Newman in Appendix A. See also Chuinard (CMML) for an assessment of this incident.The stream has no name on Atlas map 26, but the lake from which it flows is clearly shown. It is later ">Spring, or Hermaphrodite, Creek, reaching the Missouri in Campbell County, South Dakota. Its actual source is much farther east, in McPherson County, South Dakota. MRC map 46.Named after the second Arikara chief; later Hunkpapa Creek, in Corson County, South Dakota, named after a TetonSioux division. Just above the mouth of the creek Manuel Lisa later erected his trading post, Fort Manuel (1812–13). It was there, according to the best evidence, that Sacagawea, the expedition's Shoshone interpreter and only woman member, died on December 20, 1812. The fort site is now inundated at high water by Oahe Reservoir. Mattison (OR), 111–16; Appleman (LC), 352; Anderson (CFP), 60–61; Atlas map 26; MRC map 46.In Campbell County, about a mile south of the present North Dakota state line; their last camp in present South Dakota on the westbound journey. Atlas map 26; Coues (HLC), 1:166 n. 35; MRC map 46.This course is missing from the Field Notes entry.The Jacques is the James River. The "R de Seauex" may be the Bois des Sioux River, between Minnesota and the Dakotas, rather than the Big Sioux; either is difficult to fit into this description. The "Chien" is the Sheyenne River in eastern North Dakota, rather than the Cheyenne River in western South Dakota. Biddle has made some spelling changes here (not shown) as well as interlineations. The "Rouche" (Rouge) is the Red River of the North. The St. Peters is the Minnesota River.Newman was tried on October 13. Clark's reference to "last night" indicates that he wrote this Codex C entry the following day. At this time, it would appear, he was copying and expanding his Field Notes in his notebook journal soon after the former were written.The Field Notes entry, above, says that there were seven men on the court; the numeral is quite distinct. The Orderly Book's record of the trial lists nine members.The first portion of this order in the Orderly Book is in Clark's hand, except for Lewis's own signature. The remainder, after the signatures, is in Lewis's hand."N W D" probably stands for "northwest discovery." The "E" may stand for "engineer," since Clark had expected to be commissioned a captain in the Corps of Engineers, and the captains were concealing from the men the fact that he had actually only been commissioned a second lieutenant in the Artillery. Alternatively, "E" might stand for "expedition."Clark's"Stone Idol Creek, now "Spring, or Hermaphrodite, Creek, Campbell County, South Dakota. Ordway's name reflects its supposed origin in a nearby small lake.Newman was found guilty of "having uttered repeated expressions of a highly criminal and mutinous nature." He was sentenced to receive seventy-five lashes on the bare back and to be dismissed from the party. He would spend the winter at labor and was sent back with the return party in the spring.