August 24, 1806ClarkSunday 24 August 1806
a fair morning    we Set out as usial about Sunrise and proceeded on untill 2 P M when the wind blew So hard from the N. W. that we could not proceed    came too on the S W. Side where we continued untill 5 P. M. when the wind lay a little and we again proceeded on.    at 8 a M. we passed La-hoo-catts Island, opposit the lower point of this Island on the S. W. Side near the top of the Bluff I observed a Stratea of White stone    I landed and examined it found it to be a Soft White Stone containing very fine grit, when expd. to the Sun and become Dry this Stone will Crumble    the Clay of this bluff to the above and below is remarkably Black.    at half past 9 a. m. passed Good hope Island and at 11 a. m passed Caution Island a Short distance below this Island we came too. Sent out a hunter he Saw Several deer they were very wild and he returned without haveing killed any, the deer on this pt. of the Missouri is mostly the Mule or black tail Species.    we Saw only 6 buffalow to day the Sieoux have been laterly encamped on the river and have Secured the most of the game opp. a large trail has passed on a derection to the enterance of the Chyenne this probably is the trail of a war party.    at 5 P. M. we proceeded on a fiew miles and Encampd. on the gouge of the lookout bend of 20 miles around and ¾ through, a little above an old tradeing house and 4 miles above of our outward bound encampment of the 1st of October 1804, haveing made 43 miles to day.
Ordway
Sunday 24th August 1806.    a clear pleasant morning.    we Set out eairly and procd. on verry well    about noon the wind rose high from S. W. which detained us about three hours    then procd. on though the work against us. Camped on N. Side.


GassSunday 24th.    We had a fine morning, and went on very well till noon, when the wind rose, and blew so strong that we were obliged to halt. Having lain by three hours we again proceeded, but did not go far before we were obliged on account of the wind, again to stop, and encamp for the night.


Later Dolphees Island, between Dewey and Potter counties, South Dakota, where the party camped on October 4, 1804. Mattison (OR), 63; Atlas map 24; MRC map 43.This strata of soft white stone is a layer of bentonite—a clay derived from volcanic ash—contained within the Upper Cretaceous Pierre Shale.Later Pascal Island, between Potter and Dewey counties; see October 3, 1804. Mattison (OR), 63; Atlas map 24; MRC map 43.Later Plum Island, between Dewey and Sully counties, South Dakota; see October 2, 1804. Mattison (OR), 62; Atlas map 24; MRC map 42.Clark locates this camp above Jean Vallé's trading post and the camp of October 1, 1804. This places it near the upper end of Lookout Bend, in Dewey County, on a site now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Mattison (OR), 60; Atlas map 24; MRC map 42.