October 23, 1804Clark23rd of October 1804    Some Snow, passed 5 Lodges <of> fortified    the place the two french men were robed    Those are the hunting Camps of the mandans, who has latterly left them.    we camped on the L. S.Course Distanc &c.N. 45° E.2m. bend S. S.N. 18° W1 ½m to a High land S. S.N. 65° W.3m to a tree in a bend to the L S.N 33° W2 ½m. to a pt. on the L. S.N. 18° W.1m on the L. S.N 45° W.3m. to a point on the S. S.—Clark23rd of October Tuesday 1804
a cloudy morning Some Snow    Set out early    pass five Lodges <of India> which was Diserted, the fires yet burning    we Suppose those were the Indians who robed the 2 french Trappers a fiew days ago    those 2 men are now with us going up with a view to get their property from the Indians thro us.    cold & Cloudy camped on The L. S. of the river [NB: saw at 12 miles passed old village on S. S. of Maharha* Indns, a band of Minnetarrés who now live <with> between Mands & Minnetarres    *Ah na ha wa's    see note 10 May, 1805]23rd OctrCourse Distance & reffurencsN. 45° E  2miles to a Tree in the bend S. S.N. 18° W.  1 ½mes. to High land on the S. S.N. 65° W  3mes. to a tree in the bend L S.N. 33 W.  2 ½mes. to a pt. on the L S.N. 18° W.  1mile on the L S.N. 45° W  3miles to a point on the S. S.    passing as common many
Sand bars 13 OrdwayTuesday 23 Oct.    a little Snow last night    a cloudy morning.    we Set off eairly.    about 9 o.C. we passed the Indian Camp N. S. where the 2 frenchman was Robed a fiew days ago, they had left their Camp.    their was 3 of their lodges Standing on N. S. which was built in the Same manner as those in their villages.    proceeded on    passed Several Timbred bottoms where we Saw pleanty of Grasses Rushes &.C. Camped on S. S. at a Bottom covered with timber where we found a large quantity of Graze the Buff. or Rabit Berryes of which we eat freely off.    they are a Small red berry, Sower & Good to the taste.    we have Seen them pleanty in this Country.


GassTuesday 23rd.    Some snow again fell last night, and the morning was cloudy. At 8 it began to snow, and continued snowing to 11, when it ceased. We passed the place where the Frenchmen had been robbed but no Indians could be seen. The hills here are futher from the river than they are for some distance down it; and there are fine large bottoms on both sides covered with cotton wood. We encamped on the south side where we found a great quantity of rabbit berries. Three hunters were out to day, but killed nothing.

Whitehouse
Tuesday October 23d    We set out early this morning.    about 8 oClock it began to snow, we proceeded on, and passed by some Indian Cabbins, which the frenchmen that was with us, informed that they were robbed of their Traps & peltry at, and also pas'd some Rich bottoms cover'd with Timber lying on both sides of the River, this evening, we encamped in a bottom, lying on the South side of the River, which was cover'd with heavy timber, where we found a great quantity of Berries called Rabbit Berries.—


This site, in Oliver County, North Dakota, does not appear on Clark's maps, since the Mandan hunting camp marked on Atlas map 29 is upstream from the October 23 camp of the party.Near present Sanger, Oliver County. Atlas map 29; MRC map 51.On Atlas map 29 this appears as "Old village of Ah na ha was band," probably the Molander site, in Oliver County. The former inhabitants were the Awaxawis, who became a division of the Hidatsas, or Minitaris, who occupied the area about 1760, before moving to the mouth of the Knife River. The bracketed material was added later, perhaps by Biddle in 1810. The reference date is in error; it is to a brief note on the tribe in Clark's entry for March 10, 1805. Wood & Moulton, 384–85; MRC map 51.Buffaloberry again.