December 13, 1805ClarkDecember 13th Friday 1805
The Indians left us to day after brackfast, haveing Sold us 2 of the robes of a Small animal for which I intend makeing a Capot, and Sold Capt Lewis 2 Loucirvia Skins for the Same purpose.  Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting havg. killed 18 Elk and butchered all except 2 which they Could not get as night provented ther finding them & they Spoild.
3 Indians in a Canoe Came and offered us for Sale Sinutor roots, fish & 2 Sea otter Skins for Sale none of which we Could purchase.    Some rain last night and this day at Several times, light Showers.    we Continue building our houses of the Streightest & [one word illegible] logs, Sent out 2 men to Split timber to Cover the Cabins, and I am glad to find the timber Splits butifully, and of any width—
ClarkFriday 13th December 1805
The Clatsops leave us to day after a brackfast on Elk which they appeared to be very fond of  before they left us they Sold me two robes of the Skins of a Small animal about the Size of a Cat, and to Captain Lewis 2 Cat or Loucirva Skins for the purpose of makeing a Coat.    Drewyer & Shannon returned from hunting, haveing killed 18 Elk & left them boochered in the woods near the right fork of the river about 6 miles above this place—    in the evining 3 Indians came in a Canoe, and offered to us for Sale roots & 2 Sea otter Skins, neither of which we Could purchase this evening.    Some Showers of rain last night, and to day Several verry hard Showers—    we Continue to put up the Streight butifull balsom pine on our houses—and we are much pleased to find that the timber Splits most butifully and to the width of 2 feet or more.
Ordway
Friday 13th Decr. 1805.    cloudy & rain    we raised another line of our huts and began the last line of our huts forming three [sides of a] Square and 7 rooms 16 by 18 feet large.    the other Square we intend to picket and have gates at the 2 corners, So as to have it a defensive fort. Capt. Lewis bought Several kinds of curious Skins from the natives as a curiousity Such as wild cat and Some other Small Skins which the Indians Call Shugolell which they make Robes of.    in the evening our 2 hunters returned    had killed 17 Elk.


GassFriday 13th.    We had a cloudy, but fine morning; and all hands were engaged at work. The party of Indians who came yesterday went away, and another party came about the middle of the day. Two hunters came in, and had killed 18 elk, not more than 4 miles distant. The day continued cloudy and some rain fell in the evening.
Whitehouse
Friday decemr. 13th    We had rain & Cloudy weather, during the whole of this day.    We raised another line of our Huts.    they had 2 Rooms in each hut, & were 16 feet in the clear.    We finished raising the huts, & began the foundation of another line of them in the same Manner, of those we had raised.    the three lines composed 3 Squares, & the other square we intend picketting in, & to have 2 Gates at the two Corners.    We had several more Indians at our Camp this day.    they came in Canoes to see us, & to trade.    Captain Lewis purchased several kinds of Skins from these Indians, some of which were unknown to us & a curiosity <to us>.—    Our two hunters that had been out hunting for some days, returned to our Camp; they informed us that they had killed 17 Elk, Geese, Ducks &ca.—



The French term loup cervier denotes the Canada lynx, Lynx canadensis. Burroughs, 92. In the second entry Clark notes that the small animal mentioned first was about the "Size of a Cat," by which he probably means the Oregon bobcat.Opinions differ as to whether this tree was Douglas fir, grand fir, or Sitka spruce. Cutright (LCPN), 248. The best opinion suggests the grand fir. "Balsam" refers to the blisters of fragrant pitch, characteristically found on the smooth bark of the younger trees and injured older trees of the grand fir. The favorably splitting timber also strongly suggests the grand fir. See Lewis's description of the grand fir at February 6, 1806.Probably the Oregon bobcat, Lynx rufus fasciatus.Ordway attempts the Chinookan term now Anglicized as "sewelel," for the mountain 
beaver, Aplodontia rufa. It is Lower Chinookan swalál; see Lewis's entry of February 26, 1806.Skins of the Oregon bobcat, Lynx rufus fasciatus, and the mountain beaver, Aplodontia rufa. See Ordway's entry for this day.