September 27, 1805ClarkSeptr. 27th Thursday 1805
Set all the men able to work abt. building Canoes, Colter returned and found one horse & the Canister of Shot left in the mountains    he also killed a Deer ½ of which he brought    hot day—    men Sick
Clark27th Septr. Wednesday [NB: Friday] 1805
all the men able to work comened building 5 Canoes, Several taken Sick at work, our hunters returned Sick without meet. J. Colter returned he found only one of the lost horses, on his way killed a deer, half of which he gave the Indians the other proved nourishing to the Sick    The day verry hot, we purchase fresh Salmon of them    Several Indians Come up the river from a Camp Some distance below    Capt Lewis very Sick nearly all the men Sick.    our ShoshoneeIndian Guide employed himself makeing flint points for his arrows
Ordway
Friday 27th Sept. 1805.    a fair morning the party divided into five differeent parties and went at falling five pitch pine trees for 5 canoes, all near our Encampment.    in the afternoon the man who went back to the Mountain for the 2 horses returned.    had found one of the horses, and had killed a large deer and brought a part of it with him.—

GassFriday 27th.    A fine warm morning. All the men, who were able were employed in making canoes. About 10 o'clock the man came in who had gone to look for the horses, he had found one of them and killed a deer. I feel much relieved from my indisposition.
In the evening the greater part of the war party came in, and some of the principal men came down to our camp. We could not understand what they had done, as we could only converse by signs. Medals were given by the Commanding Officers to 3 or 4 of them as leading men of their nation; and they remained about our camp. The river below the fork is about 200 yards wide;
 the water is clear as crystal, from 2 to 5 feet deep, and abounding with salmon of an excellent quality. The bottom of the river is stony and the banks chiefly composed of a round hard species of stone.


WhitehouseFriday 27th Sept. 1805.    a fair morning.    the party divided in five parties and went at falling five pitch pine trees for canoes, all near the Camp.    in the afternoon the man who went back to the mountains after the lost horses joined us    had found one of the horses, & had killed a large Deer, which he 
brought to Camp with him.—
Friday Septemr. 27th    A fine pleasant morning, Some of our party that were well went out in five parties, in Order to cut down five pitch pine Trees for to make Canoes; which they found near to our Camp, In the afternoon the Man who went back to the Mountains after the horses that we lost, joined us, he had found one of the horses & had killed a large Deer which he brought to our Camp with him

Colter.