October 5, 1804Clark5th of October Friday 1804    Frost this morning, Set out early    passed a Small Creek on the L. S.    saw 3 Tetons on the S. S.    they beged Some Tobacco, we proceed on    passed a Creek on the S. S.    I Saw a white brant in a gangue on the Sand bar    Saw a large herd of Cabra or antelopes Swiming the River, we Killed four of them    passed a Small Island on the L. S.    a large Creek on the L. S. at the head of the Island White Brant Creek, I walked on the Island which is covered with wild rye, I Killed a Buck & a Small wolf this evening, Clear pleasant evening, Camped on a mud bar S. S.    refreshd the men with whiskey.Course Distance &c.N 63° E1 ½miles to high land on the L. S.East3m. to a pt. of Timber on the L. S.    passed a Creek L. S.N. 80° E1 ½m to a tree in a bend to S. S.N. 36° W.2m. to a pt. of high Land on the L. S.    passed a Creek on
the S. S.N. 50° W.3m. to a pt. on the S. S.N. 17° W.3to a tree on the S. S.    passed an Island and Creek L. S.N. 16° E6m. to a point on the L. S. opposit a willow Isd.Clark5th of October Friday 1804
Frost this morning, we Set out early and proceeded on    (1) passed a Small Creek on the L. S.    at 7 oclock heard Some yels    proceeded on Saw 3 Indians of the Teton band, they called to us to Come on Shore, beged Some Tobacco, we answd. them as usial and proceeded on,    passed (2) a Creek on the S. S.    at <the> 3 mes. abov the mouth we Saw one white <goose> Brant in a gang of about 30, the others all as dark as usial, a Discription of this kind of Gees or Brant Shall be given here after    Saw a Gang of Goats Swiming across the river out of which we killed four    they were not fatt.    in the evening passed a Small (3) Island Situated Close to the L. Side, at the head of this Isd. a large Creek coms in on the L. S.    Saw white <Gees> or Brants, we Call this Creek white <gees> Brant Creek—    I walked on the Isd.    found it Covered with wild rye, I Shot a Buck, Saw a large gang of Goat on the hills opposit, one Buck killed, also a Prarie wolf this evening, the high Land not So high as below, river about the Same width, the Sand bars as noumerous, the earth Black and many of the Bluffs have the appearance of being on fire, we Came too and Camped on a mud bar makeing from the L. S.    The evening is Calm and pleasant, refreshed the men with a glass of whiskey—5th OctoberCourse Distance & reffurences.N. 63° E.  1 ½under Some high land on the S. S.East  3miles to a point of Timber on the L. S.    passed a Creek
on the L. S. (1)    high land on the S. S.N. 80 E  1 ½mes. to a Tree in the bend to the S. S.N. 36° W.  2mes. to a pt. of high land on the L. S.    passed a Creek on
the S. S. (2)N. 50° W  3miles to a Point to the S. S.N. 17° W.  3mes. to a tree on the S. S.    passd a Small Island Close on
the L. S. above the Sd. Island a Creek comes in on the
L. S.N. 16° E.  6mes. to a pt. on the L. Side opposit a willow Island Situ-
ated near the S. Shore 20 OrdwayFriday 5th Oct. 1804.    a white frost this morning. Clear & Cool.    we Set off eairly.    passed Some wood in a bottom S. S. See Several Indians on the Shore on N. S.    at 11 oClock we Saw a flock of Goats Swimming the River towards the South Shore.    one of our hunters ran up the Shore & killed 4 of them    we took them on board the Boat & pearogues.    passed a Creek on N. S. called white Goat Creek.    passd black Bluffs on S. S.    we halted took dinner at a Timbered bottom S. S. below an Island.    dressed & took care of our Goat meat as we had no other fresh meat on hand.    found it to be verry Sweet Good meat.    proceeded on passing the Island    we killed a Small prarie woolf Swimming the River.    passed high Black Bluff on N. S. & a large Bottom covered with Timber. Capt. Clark & 2 of the hunters went out hunting—    we passed the Bottom & Camped on N. S. Capt Clark & the
rest of the hunters returned.    had killed & brought in a Deer.—    had killed or wounded 2 more but did not get them.


GassFriday 5th. This morning there was a white frost; the day clear and pleasant. About 11 we saw some goats swimming the river, when one of our hunters ran up the shore and killed four of them, and we took them into the boat and periogues as they floated down. We passed a creek on the north side, called Hidden creek, and high black bluffs on the south side. Some of our hunters having gone on an island to hunt scared a prairie wolf into the river, which we killed. We passed a creek on the south side called White Goat 
creek, and encamped on the north side.


Whitehouse
Friday 5th Oct. 1804.    Set off eairly    Some whight frost last night.    the day clear and pleasant.    about 11 oClock we Saw Some Goats Swimming the river.    one of our hunters Shot 4 of them.    passed a creek on the N. S.    
called hidden Creek.    we killed a prarie wolf Swimming in the river    passed a creek on the S. S. called whight Goat creek.    Camped on the S. Side.
Friday October 5th    This morning we had a White frost, we set out early, the day being clear & pleasant; we proceeded on about 11 o'Clock A. M. we saw some Goats swimming the River, one of our Hunters pursued them in a Pettyauger & killed four of them, which was brought on board—    We continued on, and passed a Creek, lying on the North side of the River called hidden creek    Shortly after we saw a Priari Wolf swimming across the River, which One of the Men Shot & we got on board—
We proceeded on, and passed a Creek, lying on the South side of the River, called  white Goat Creek, and encamped in the Evening on the South side of the River—


Now the Little Cheyenne River, otherwise Cheyenne Creek, reaching the Missouri in Potter County, South Dakota. It appears as "Hidden Creek" on Atlas map 24. MRC map 43; MRY map 92. The captains' references to "brant" are often obscure, especially since brant and geese often migrate in mixed flocks. The white brant here may be the snow goose, Chen caerulescens [AOU, 169]. The darker birds mentioned in Codex C, below, may be the brant, Branta bernicla [AOU, 173). The darker birds may not be brant, however, since they are uncommon in South Dakota. It is not clear what bird Clark saw, but it may have been a "blue" phase snow goose. Coues (HLC), 1:154 n. 22; Burroughs, 192–93.This creek, in Dewey County, South Dakota, retained the same name late in the nineteenth century, according to MRC map 43; more recently it was  Swift Bird Creek. Atlas map 24; MRY map 93.Elymus canadensis L., Canada wild rye. Barkley, 489.In Potter County, in an area now inundated by Oahe Reservoir. Atlas map 24; Mattison (OR), 71–72; MRC map 43.Pierre Shale (see entries of August 24 and September 14, 1804, for a discussion of "fire").Clark'sWhite Brant Creek; it is today's  Swift Bird Creek, Dewey County, South Dakota.McKeehan's note: "To prevent mistakes, owing to the very winding course of the river, Starboard side and Larboard side were made use of in the original journal, instead of north side and south side; during the remainder of the voyage up the Missouri; but have been changed to north side and south side, as being better understood, and sufficiently representing the general course of the river."The "4" in 1804 is written over either a "5" or "6."If this is Whitehouse's hand, and it appears no different from other writing of the journalist designated No. 1, he has misspelled "white." Clark called it White Brant Creek, a name it retained until late in the nineteenth century; it is now  Swift Bird Creek, Dewey County, South Dakota.