September 15, 1803Lewis15 September
Set out this morning at sunrise, passed the mouth of the little Kanaway one mile below our encampment of last evening on the Virginia shore    it is about 60 yards wide at it's mouth     there is a considerable settlement on this river    it heads with the Monongahela, passed the mouths of the little and big Hockhockin and the settlement of Bellpray—a yanke settlement    passed several bad riffles over which we were obliged to lift the boat, saw and caught by means of my dog several squirrels, attempting to swim the river, one of these, the only instance I have observed, was swiming from the S. E. to the N. W. shore—    one of the canoes fell a considerable distance behind, we were obliged to ly too for her coming up which detained us several hours; it rained very hard on us from 7 this morning untill about three when it broke away and evening as clear with a few flying clouds.    took up on the Virginia shore having mad 18 miles this day.—The Little Kanawha River joins the Ohio just south of Parkersburg, Wood County, West Virginia. The settlement may well have been Parkersburg's predecessor, Stokleyville. The name Kanawha may come from Conoy, the designation of a local Algonquian tribe related to the Delawares. Hodge 1:339–41; Swanton, 57–58.Lewis was not quite correct here, but the West Fork of the Monongahela and the Little Kanawha run within a few miles of one another in southern Lewis County, West Virginia.The Little Hocking River flows into the Ohio a few miles below Belpre, Washington County, Ohio; the Hocking River enters the Ohio at Hockingport on the border of Athens and Meigs counties, Ohio. Hockhocking was the spelling in Lewis's day, and may mean "above-there-is (arable)-land" in the Algonquian language. Stewart (APN), 207.One of two settlements here: Belpre, Ohio, just across from the Little Kanawha River, or Belleville, in Wood County, West Virginia, a few miles below the Hocking River. Belleville was called Bellepre about the time Lewis passed down the Ohio, and since he names the town after mentioning the Little Hocking and Hocking rivers, it seems more likely he means Belleville, as Belpre is above those two streams. Thwaites (EWT), 4:127, 131; Quaife (MLJO), 44–45 n. 5.In the vicinity of Belleville, about seventeen miles below the Little Kanawha. Quaife (MLJO), 45 n. 1.