March 10, 1806LewisMonday March 10th 1806.
About 1 P. M. it became fair and we sent out two parties of hunters on this side of the Netul the one below and the other above.    we also directed a party to set out early in the morning and pass the bay and hunt beyond the Kilhowanackkle.    from the last we have considerable hope as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter.    it blew hard all day.    in the evening the Indians departed. The hunters who were over the Netull the other day informed us that they measured a pine tree, (or fir No 1) which at the hight of a man's breast was 42 feet in the girth about three feet higher, or as high as a tall man could reach, it was 40 feet in the girth which was about the circumpherence for at least 200 feet without a limb, and that it was very lofty above the commencement of the limbs.    from the appearance of other trees of this speceis of fir and their account of this tree, I think it may be safely estimated at 300 feet.    it had every appearance of being perfectly sound. The black and white duck are small abut the size of the blue-winged teal, or reather larger.    the male is beautifully variagated with black and white.    the white occupys the sides of the head, breast and back, black, the tail feathers of the wings two tufts of feathers which cover the upper part of the wings when foalded, the neck and head.    the female is darker or has much less white about her. I take this to be the same speceis of duck common to the Atlantic coast, and frequently called the butterbox.    the beak is wide and short, and as well as the legs, of a dark colour.    the flesh of this duck is very well flavored.    the brown duck is much in form like the duckinmallard, tho' not much more than half it's size.    the colour is an uniform mixture of yellowish and dark brown.    there is nothing remarkable in the appearance of this duck it generally resorts the same kind of grassey marshes with the duckinmallard and feeds in a similar manner, on grass seed, and roots.    both these ducks are common to the river for some distance above tide water as well as below. The black duck is about the size of the bluewinged teal.    their colour is a duskey black the breast and belley somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown.    the legs stand longitudinally with the body, and the bird when on shore stands of cours very erect.    the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are four on each foot, a short one at the heel and three long toes in front, which are unconnected with a web.    the webs are attatched to each sides of the several joints of the toe, and divided by deep sinuses at each joint.    the web assuming in the intermediate part an eliptical figure.    the beak is about two inches long, streight, flated on the sides, and tapering to a sharp point.    the upper chap somewhat longest, and bears on it's base at the joining of the head, a little conic protuberance of a cartelagenous substace, being redish brown at the point.    the beak is of an ivory white colour.    the eye dark.    these ducks usually associate in large flocks, and are very noisey; their note being a sharp shrill whistle.    they are usually fat and agreeably flavored; and feed principally on moss, and other vegitable productions of the water.    we did not meet with them untill we reached tide-water, but I believe them not exclusively confined to that district at all seasons, as I have noticed the same duck on many parts of the Rivers Ohio and Mississippi.    the gizzard and liver are also remarkably large in this fowl.    the divers are the same with those of the Atlantic States.    the smaller species has some white feathers about the rump with no perceptable tail and is very active and quck in it's motion; the body is of a redish brown.    the beak sharp and somewhat curved like that of the pheasant.    the toes are not connected but webed like those discribed of the black duck.    the larger speceis are about the size of the teal and can flye a short distance which the small one scarcely ever attapts.    they have a short tail.    their colour is also an uniform brickredish brown, the beak is streight and pointed.    the feet are of the same form of the other speceis and the legs are remarkably thin and flat one edge being in front.    the food of both speceis is fish, and the flesh unfit for uce.    the bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and are the same with those of the Atlantic coast.— There are some other speceis of ducks which shall be hereafter discribed as I may hereafter have an opportunity to examine them.—
ClarkMonday March 10th 1806
about 1 P. M. it became fair and we Sent out two parties of hunters on this Side of the Netul, one above and the other below, we also derected a party to Set out early in the morning and pass Meriwethers Bay and hunt beyond the Kilhow anak kle.    from the last we have considerable hope, as we have as yet hunted but little in that quarter.    it blew hard all day, in the evening the Indians  departed. The Hunters, S. R. F. & F. who were over the netul the other day informed us that they measured a 2d tree of the fir Speces (No. 1) as high as a man Could reach, was 39 feet in the girth; it tapered but very little for about 200 feet without any Considerable limbs, and that it was a very lofty above the Commencement of the limbs.    from the appearance of other Species of fir, and their account of this tree, I think it might safely estimated at 300 feet.    it had every appearance of being perfectly Sound in every part—.
The brown Duck is much in form like the Duckinmallard, tho' not much more than half it's Size.    the colour is one uniform mixture of yellowish and dark brown.    there is nothing remarkable in the colour of this duck; it resorts the Same kind of grassy marshes with the Duckinmallard, and feeds in a Similar manner, on grass, Seeds & roots.    both these ducks are common to the river for Some distance above tide water as well as below. The black Duck is about the Size of the bluewinged teel.    their colour is a duskey black the breast and belly Somewhat lighter than the other parts, or a dark brown.    the legs Stand longitudianally with the body, and the Bird when on Shore Stands very erect.    the legs and feet are of a dark brown, the toes are four on each foot, a short one on the heel and three long toes in front which are unconnected with a web.    the web is atached to each Side of the Several joints of the toes, and devided by deep Sinuses at each joint.    the web assumeing in the intermediate part an elipticle figure.    the beak is about two inches long, Streight, flated on the Sides, and tapering to a Sharp point.    the upper chap Somewhat longest and bears on its base at the joining of the head, a little conic protuberance of a cartelaganous Substance, being redish brown.    the beak is of a ivery white colour.    the eye dark.    these ducks usially associate in large flocks, and are very noisey; their note being a Sharp shrill whistle.    they are usially fat and tolerably flavoured; and feed on moss and other vegitable productions of the water.    we did not meet with them untill we reached tide water, I have noticed the Same duck on maney parts of the ohio an Mississippi.    the Gizzard and liver are also remarkably large in this fowl—. The Divers are the Same with those of the atlantic States.    the Smaller Species has some white feathers about the rump and no perceptable tail and is very active and quick in its motion; the body is of a redish brown.    the beak sharp and Somewhat curved like that of the Pheasant the toes are not connected but webd. like those discribed of the black duck. The large Species are about the Size of the teal &c.    the food of both those Species is fish.    and their flesh is unfit for use.
The bluewinged teal are a very excellent duck, and are the Same with those of the atlantic coast.— There are some other Species of ducks which Shall be hereafter discribd. as I may hereafter have an oppertunity of exameneing them.

Ordway
Monday 10th March 1806. Showers of hail and a little Snow intermixed. Several men went out a hunting.    high winds &C.


Gass
On the 10th, we had changeable weather, with snow showers. At noon two more hunters went out.


Whitehouse
Monday March 10th    We had Showers of rain, with Snow and hail.    several of our Men went out a hunting.    the wind blew hard this day.    Our party are engaged at the fort in repairing the Canoes & dressing of Skins &ca.


Including Drouillard, Joseph Field, and Frazer, as Lewis notes in the next entry.Sitka spruce; see above, February 4, 1806. Two red vertical lines go through several lines about the spruce and bufflehead, perhaps done by Biddle.See March 5, 1806.The American coot. Another red vertical line here.The pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps [AOU, 6]. Burroughs, 178; Holmgren, 29.The red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena [AOU, 2], or the horned grebe, P. auritus [AOU, 3]. Burroughs, 177–78; Holmgren, 29.Shields, Reubin Field, and Frazer.Two parties, according to the captains, along the Lewis and Clark River, and another, 
consisting of Drouillard, Reubin Field, and Frazer, to go beyond Youngs River. See the captains' entries for March 10 and 11.