November 29, 1805LewisNovember 29th 1805.
the wind being so high the party were unable to proceed with the perogues.    I determined therefore to proceed down the river on it's E. side in surch of an eligible place for our winters residence and accordingly set out early this morning in the small canoe accompanyed by 5 men.    drewyerR. Fields, Shannon, Colter & labiesh.    proceeded along the coast.S. 40 W.5m. to a point of land passing twow points one at 3 m. bearing
S 10 W. and the 2ed at 1½ further a little retreating from the
1st    land high and woods thick.S. 35 W.2ml. along the point, land still high and thickly timbered here a
deep bay commences runingS. 40 E.2m. along the bay.    the land more open, pass a small prarie at
1 M.
send out the hunters they killed 4 deer 2 brant a goos and seven ducks, it rained upon us by showers all day.    left three of these deer and took with us one    encamped at an old Indian hunting lodge which afforded us a tolerable shelter from the rain, which continued by intervales throughout the night.—
ClarkNovember 29th Friday 1805
Blew hard and rained the greater part of the last night and this morning, Capt Lewis and 5 men Set out in our Small Indian canoe (which is made in the Indian fashion Calculated ride the waves) down the South Side of the river to the place the Indians informed us by Signs that numbers of Elk were to be found near the river—    The Swells and waves being too high for us to proceed down in our large Canoes, in Safty—
I Sent out two hunters to hunt deer, & one to hunt fowl, all the others employed in drying their leather and prepareing it for use, as but fiew of them have many other Clothes to boste of at this time, we are Smoked verry much in this Camp    The Shore on the Side next the Sea is Covered with butifull pebble of various Colours—    our diat at this time and for Severall days past is the dried pounded fish we purchased at the falls boiled in a little Salt water—.
ClarkFriday 29th of November 1805
The wind and rain Continued all the last night, this morning much more moderate.    the waves Still high and rain Continues. Capt Lewis and 5 hunters Set out in our Indian Canoe (which is Calculated to ride wave) dow to the place we expected to find Elk from the Inds. information, the[y] pointed to a Small Bay which is yet below us—    I Sent out 2 men to hunt Deer which I expected might be on the open hill Sides below, another to hunt fowl in the deep bend above the point, all the others engaged drying their leather before the fire, and prepareing it for use—they haveing but fiew other Species of Clothing to ware at this time
The winds are from Such points that we cannot form our Camp So as to provent the Smoke which is emencely disagreeable, and painfull to the eyes—    The Shore below the point at our Camp is formed of butifull pebble of various colours. I observe but fiew birds of the Small kind, great numbers of wild fowls of Various kinds, the large Buzzard with white wings, grey and bald eagle's, large red tailed Hawks, ravens & Crows in abundance, the blue Magpie, a Small brown bird which frequents logs & about the roots of trees—    Snakes, Lizards, Small bugs, worms, Spiders, flyes & insects of different kinds are to be <found> Seen in abundance at this time.Ordway
Friday 29th Nov. 1805. Capt. Lewis and five men Set out with the Small canoe in order to go down the River to look out a place for winters quarters. Showery and Some hail in the course of the day.


GassFriday 29th.    The weather continues cloudy and wet. Capt. Lewis with 4 men started, to go down and examine whether there is good hunting and whether we can winter near the salt water. Some of the hunters went out and in the evening returned without killing any game, which appears scarce. The hunting is also difficult, the country being full of thickets and fallen timber. There were some showers of rain and hail during the day.


Whitehouse
Friday Novemr 29th    It rained very hard all last night, & continued showery this morning.    Captain Lewis & five of our Men, set out in our small Canoe, in order to go down towards the Mouth of the River, to look out for a place to Winter at.    The weather continued showery, & some hail fell during this day.—    Some of our party are unwell owing to our having nothing to live on but pounded Salmon.—    & being continually wet.—




Here begins Lewis's fragmentary Codex Ia, running through December 1, 1805. It consists of five loose sheets, perhaps drawn from one of the marbled-covered note-books. See Introduction and Appendix C.Probably meaning "L." for larboard, the southern bank of the Columbia facing downstream.On this point, in Clatsop County, Oregon, members of John Jacob Astor's Pacific Fur Company founded the trading post of Astoria in 1811, having arrived by sea in the ship Tonquin. They sold the post to the British in 1812, and it became the North West Company post of Fort George. The present city on the point is named Astoria. The bay is Youngs Bay, unnamed on Atlas map 82, but called Meriwether's Bay by the party (see entry of December 7, 1805). Irving (Astor); Ross; Cox; Franchère (JV); Franchère (AA).Not marked on Atlas maps 82 or 92 (nor are Lewis's route or other camps on this journey), but on the shores of Youngs Bay, in Clatsop County, probably within the present bounds of Astoria.The colored pebbles were probably derived from the Pliocene-age Troutdale Formation which contains rounded quartz and chert gravels derived from sources upstream in the Columbia Plateaus and deposited in this area by the Columbia River.The "grey and bald eagle's" are, respectively, golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos [AOU, 349], and bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus [AOU, 352]. Burroughs, 204–8. See a discussion of the gray eagle at July 11, 1805.Red-tailed hawk, Buteo jamaicensis [AOU, 337], a widespread species already known to science. Ibid., 208; Coues (HLC), 2:724.Probably the common raven, Corvus corax [AOU, 486], and the American crow, C. brachyrhyncho [AOU, 488]. See also September 22, 1805. Burroughs, 248; Cutright (LCPN), 432.Steller's jay, Cyanocitta stelleri [AOU, 478], first noted by Lewis on September 20, 1805. The captain gives a full description in an undated entry, ca. December 18, 1805. Burroughs, 248–49.Perhaps the winter wren, Troglodytes troglodytes [AOU, 722], and if so, then new to science; see below, March 4, 1806. Burroughs, 252; Cutright (LCPN), 274, 438.These zoological observations have a red vertical line running through, drawn perhaps by Biddle.Drouillard, Reubin Field, Shannon, Colter, and Labiche, according to Lewis.Lewis says five: Drouillard, Reubin Field, Shannon, Colter, and Labiche.Drouillard, Reubin Field, Shannon, Colter, and Labiche, reports Lewis.