August 19, 1805LewisMonday August 19th 1805.
This morning I arrose at dylight and sent out three hunters.    some of the men who were much in want of legings and mockersons I suffered to dress some skins.    the others I employed in repacking the baggage, making pack saddles &c.    we took up the net this morning but caugt no fish.    one beaver was caught in a trap.    the frost which perfectly whitened the grass this morning had a singular appearance to me at this season.    this evening I made a few of the men construct a sein of willow brush which we hawled and caught a large number of fine trout and a kind of mullet about 16 Inhes long which I had not seen before.    the scales are small, the nose is long and obtusely pointed and exceedes the under jaw.    the mouth is not large but opens with foalds at the sides, the colour of it's back and sides is of a bluish brown and belley white; it has the faggot bones, from which I have supposed it to be of the mullet kind. the tongue and pallate are smooth and it has no teeth.    it is by no means as good as the trout.    the trout are the same which I first met with at the falls of the Missouri, they are larger than the speckled trout of our mountains and equally as well flavored.—    The hunters returned this evening with two deer.    from what has <already> been said of the Shoshones it will be readily perceived that they live in a wretched stait of poverty.    yet notwithstanding their extreem poverty they are not only cheerfull but even gay, fond of gaudy dress and amusements; like most other Indians they are great egotists and frequently boast of heroic acts which they never performed.    they are also fond of games of wrisk.    they are frank, communicative, fair in dealing, generous with the little they possess, extreemly honest, and by no means beggarly.    each individual is his own sovereign master, and acts from the dictates of his own mind; the authority of the Cheif being nothing more than mere admonition supported by the influence which the propiety of his own exammplery conduct may have acquired him in the minds of the individuals who composed the band.    the title of cheif is not hereditary, nor can I learn that there is any cerimony of instalment, or other epoh in the life of a Cheif from which his title as such can be dated.    in fact every man is a chief, but all have not an equal influence on the minds of the other members of the community, and he who happens to enjoy the greatest share of confidence is the principal Chief. The Shoshones may be estimated as about 100 warriors, and about three times that number of woomen and children.    they have more children among them than I expected to have seen among a people who procure subsistence with such difficulty.    there are but few very old persons, nor did they appear to treat those with much tenderness or rispect. The man is the sole propryetor of his wives and daughters, and can barter or dispose of either as he thinks proper.    a plurality of wives is common among them, but these are not generally sisters as with the Minetares & Mandans but are purchased of different fathers. The father frequently disposes of his infant daughters in marriage to men who are grown or to men who have sons for whom they think proper to provide wives.    the compensation given in such cases usually consists of horses or mules which the father receives at the time of contract and converts to his own uce.    the girl remains with her parents untill she is conceived to have obtained the age of puberty which with them is considered to be about the age of 13 or 14 years.    the female at this age is surrendered to her sovereign lord and husband agreeably to contract, and with her is frequently restored by the father quite as much as he received in the first instance in payment for his daughter; but this is discretionary with the father. Sah-car-gar-we-ah had been thus disposed of before she was taken by the Minnetares, or had arrived to the years of puberty.    the husband was yet living and with this band.    he was more than double her age and had two other wives.    he claimed her as his wife but said that as she had had a child by another man, who was Charbono, that he did not want her. They seldom correct their children particularly the boys who soon become masters of their own acts.    they give as a reason that it cows and breaks the Sperit of the boy to whip him, and that he never recovers his independence of mind after he is grown. They treat their women but with little rispect, and compel them to perform every species of drudgery.    they collect the wild fruits and roots, attend to the horses or assist in that duty cook dreess the skins and make all their apparal, collect wood and make their fires, arrange and form their lodges, and when they travel pack the horses and take charge of all the baggage; in short the man dose little else except attend his horses hunt and fish.    the man considers himself degraded if he is compelled to walk any distance, and if he is so unfortunately poor as only to possess two horses    he rides the best himself and leavs the woman or women if he has more than one, to transport their baggage and children on the other, and to walk if the horse is unable to carry the additional weight of their persons—    the chastity of their women is not held in high estimation, and the husband will for a trifle barter the companion of his bead for a night or longer if he conceives the reward adiquate; tho' they are not so importunate that we should caress their women as the siouxs were and some of their women appear to be held more sacred than in any nation we have seen    I have requested the men to give them no cause of jealousy by having connection with their women without their knowledge, which with them strange as it may seem is considered as disgracefull to the husband as clandestine connections of a similar kind are among civilized nations.    to prevent this mutual exchange of good officies altogether I know it impossible to effect, particularly on the part of our young men whom some months abstanence have made very polite to those tawney damsels.    no evil has yet resulted and I hope will not from these connections.—    notwithstanding the late loss of horses which this people sustained by the Minnetares the stock of the band may be very safetly estimated at seven hundred of which they are perhaps about 40 coalts and half that number of mules.— these people are deminutive in stature, thick ankles, crooked legs, thick flat feet and in short but illy formed, at least much more so in general than any nation of Indians I ever saw.    their complexion is much that of the Siouxs or darker than the Minnetaresmandands or Shawnees.    generally both men and women wear their hair in a loos lank flow over the sholders and face; tho' I observed some few men who confined their hair in two equal cues hanging over each ear and drawnn in front of the body. the cue is formed with throngs of dressed lather or Otterskin aternately crossing each other.    at present most of them have cut short in the neck in consequence of the loss of their relations by the Minnetares. Cameahwait has his cut close all over his head.    this constitutes their cerimony of morning for their deceased relations.    the dress of the men consists of a robe long legings, shirt, tippet and Mockersons, that of the women is also a robe, chemise, and Mockersons; sometimes they make use of short legings.    the ornements of both men and women are very similar, and consist of several species of sea shells, blue and white beads, bras and Iron arm bands, plaited cords of the sweet grass, and collars of leather ornamented with the quills of the porcupine dyed of various colours among which I observed the red, yellow, blue, and black.    the ear is purforated in the lower part to receive various ornaments but the nose is not, nor is the ear lasserated or disvigored for this purpose as among many nations. the men never mark their skins by birning, cuting, nor puncturing and introducing a colouring matter as many nations do.    there women sometimes puncture a small circle on their forehead nose or cheeks and thus introduce a black matter usually soot and grease which leaves an indelible stane.    tho' this even is by no means common.    their arms offensive and defensive consist in the bow and arrows sheild, some lances, and a weapon called by the Cippeways who formerly used it, the pog-gar'-mag-gon'. in fishing they employ wairs, gigs, and fishing hooks.    the salmon is the principal object of their pursuit.    they snair wolves and foxes. I was anxious to learn whether these people had the venerial, and made the enquiry through the intrepreter and his wife; the information was that they sometimes had it but I could not learn their remedy; they most usually die with it's effects.    this seems a strong proof that these disorders bothe gonaroehah and Louis venerae are naive disorders of America.    tho' hese people have suffered much by the small pox which is known to be imported and perhaps those other disorders might have been contracted from other indian tribes who by a round of communication might have obtained from the Europeans since it was introduced into that quarter of the globe.    but so much detatched on the other had from all communication with the whites that I think it most probable that those disorders are original with them.    from the middle of May to the firt of September these people reside on the waters of the Columbia where they consider themselves in perfect security from their enimies as they have not as yet ever found their way to this retreat; during this season the salmon furnish the principal part of their subsistence and as this firsh either perishes or returns about the 1st of September they are compelled at this season in surch of subsistence to resort to the Missouri, in the vallies of which, there is more game even within the mountains.    here they move slowly down the river in order to collect and join other bands either of their own nation or the Flatheads, and having become sufficiently strong as they conceive venture on the Eastern side of the Rockey mountains into the plains, where the buffaloe abound.    but they never leave the interior of the mountains while they can obtain a scanty subsistence, and always return as soon as they have acquired a good stock of dryed meat in the plains; when this stock is consumed they venture again into the plains; thus alternately obtaining their food at the risk of their lives and retiring to the mountains, while they consume it.—    These people are now on the eve of their departure for the Missouri, and inform us that they expect to be joined at or about the three forks by several bands of their own nation, and a band of the Flatheads.    as I am now two busily engaged to enter at once into a minute discription of the several articles which compose their dress, impliments of war hunting fishing &c I shall pursue them at my leasure in the order they have here occurred to my mind, and have been mentioned. This morning capt. Clark continued his rout with his party, the Indians accompanying him as yesterday; he was obliged to feed them.    nothing remarkable happened during the day.    he was met by an Indian with two mules on this side of the dividing ridge at the foot of the mountain, the Indian had the politeness to offer Capt. C. one of his mules to ride as he was on foot, which he accepted and gave the fellow a waistcoat as a reward for his politeness.    in the evening he reached the creek on this side of the Indian camp and halted for the night.    his hunters killed nothing today. The Indians value their mules very highly. a good mule can not be obtained for less than three and sometimes four horses, and the most indifferent are rates at two horses.    their mules generally are the finest I ever saw without any comparison.—    today I observed time and distance of ☉'s and ☽'s nearest limbs with sextant ☉ East. it being thePoint of Observation No. 43. Time     Distance h      m    s  A.M.11    37    11 65°    53'    15"   "    39    50   "      52    —   "    44    15   "      50    45   "    46    18   "      49    — Time Distance h      m      s  A. M.11    51    37 65°    47'    15"   "    54    43   "      45    30   "    55    53   "      44    15   "    57    40   "      43    30   "    59    30   "      42    30	
Observed Meridian Altitude of ☉'s L. L. with Octant by the back observation 69° 15' "
Latitude deduced from this observation N. 44° 37' 57.4"ClarkAugust 19th Monday 1805
A verry Cold morning Frost to be Seen    we Set out at 7 oClock and proceeded on thro a wide leavel Vallie    the Chief Shew me the place that a number of his nation was killed about 1 years past    this Vallie [X: whiet vallie] Continues 5 miles & then becoms narrow, the beaver has Damed up the River in maney places    we proceeded on up the main branch with a gradial assent to the head and passed over a low mountain and Decended a Steep Decent to a butifull Stream, passed over a Second hill of a verry Steep assent & thro' a hilly Countrey for 8 miles an Encamped on a Small Stream    the Indians with us we wer oblige to feed—    one man met me with a mule & Spanish Saddle to ride, I gave him a wistoat [waistcoat]    a mule is considered a of great value among those people    we proceeded on over a verry mountanious Countrey across the head of hollows & Springs <and encamped>

OrdwayMonday 19th August 1805.    a clear cold morning.    we took up the fish net which we set across the River last night, and the Steel traps which were Set for beaver.    no fish caught in the net.    one beaver caught in a trap.    a white frost & the grass Stiff with frost it being disagreeably cold.    the day pleasant & warm.    3 hunters out with a horse a hunting.    the men at Camp 
employed in dressing Skins packing the baggage & makeing pack saddles &C.    we caught a nomber of fine Trout covred all over with black spots in Stead of red.    in the afternoon the hunters returned to Camp & had killed and brought in 2 Deer.    light Showers of rain this even,g.    this is the place we call the upper forks of Jeffersons River & the extream navigable point of the Missourie close under the dividing ridge of the Western Country. Capt. Lewis takes observations by the Sun and moon &C.—


GassMonday 19th.    A fine morning, but cold. We proceeded on at 8 o'clock along the valley for six miles, when the hills came more close on the branch, which here divides into three parts or other small branches, and two miles further the principal branch again forks, where the mountains commence with a thick grove of small pines on our left, and large rocks on our right. At 1 o'clock we dined at the head spring of the Missouri and Jefferson river, about 25 miles from the place, where we had left the canoes, and from which the course is nearly west. About 5 miles South of us we saw snow on the top of a mountain, and in the morning there was a severe white frost: but the sun shines very warm where we now are. At three o'clock we proceeded on, and at the foot of the dividing ridge, we met two Indians coming to meet us, and who appeared very glad to see us. The people of this nation instead of shaking hands as a token of friendship, put their arms round the neck of the person they salute. It is not more than a mile from the head spring of the Missouri to the head of one of the branches of the Columbia. We proceeded on through the mountain; passed some fine springs and encamped about 36 miles from our camp, where the canoes are. Here we were met by a number of the natives.


WhitehouseMonday 19th August 1805.    a cold morning.    we Set our net across this little Stream in hopes to catch Some fish.    Several traps Set for beaver.    caught no fish in the net.    Caught one beaver in a trap.    a white frost this morning    a clear pleasant day, all hands employed in dressing Skins & Sorting the Indian goods & packing up the baggage.    Some at makeing pack Saddles &c.    three men out with a horse to hunt.    Some of the men caught a nomber of fine fish, large Trout black Spots all over them.    the hunters returned in the afternoon    had killed 2 Deer.    light Showers of rain.    we packed up the most of the baggage &c.    halled the fish net across the river but caught none any other way but with a hook & line.    Capt. Lewis takes observations here this being the upper fork of Jeffersons River & the extream navigable part of the Missourie close under the dividing ridge of the western Country.
Monday August 19th    This morning we had Cold weather, we set our net across this little stream or river, in order to try & catch some fish, but we had bad luck & catch'd none.    one of our party caught a beaver in a trap during the last night, and several traps were set this morning.    We had white frost this morning, & a clear pleasant day, The Men at our Camp were employed in dressing Skins, sorting Indian Goods, packing up the baggage, and making pack saddles; Three of our party (hunters) went out hunting, and took one of the horses, that belonged to the Indians in Camp with them.    Some of our party caught a number of fine large Salmon trout.    they are the same 
kind that we have in the United States, only differing from them in having black spots all over them.    The hunters returned in the afternoon, and brought with them 2 deer, which they had killed.    We had a Shower of rain about 3 o'Clock P. M. which lasted but a few minutes.    We hawled our net across the River but again without catching any fish, & find that the only way to catch them is with hook & line.—    Captain Lewis took an Observation this day, this being the upper fork of Jeffersons River, & the extreme navigable part of the Mesouri River and close under the dividing ridge of the Western Country, & found it to lay in 44° 35' 28 1/10 S    North Latitude & from the Mouth of the Mesouri River 3,096 Miles.—



The northern sucker; see above, August 3, 1805. It was probably Biddle who drew a red vertical line through this passage from "this evening" to "well flavored."The trout which are the same as those at the Falls of the Missouri are cutthroat trout. The speckled trout used for comparison is the brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis, with which Lewis was familiar. Lee et al., 114.Described by Lewis below, on August 23, 1805.Lewis refers to lues venerea, Latin for syphilis. The question of whether the disease originated in the Americas and spread to the Old World after 1492, or was native to both hemispheres, is still a subject of debate. Gonorrhea was often confused with syphilis in Lewis and Clark's time. Criswell, 54; Crosby, 122–64. Perhaps it was Biddle who drew a red vertical line through the phrase, "I was anxious . . . venerial." Another line seems to continue the first and may have been intended to strike the entire passage about veneral disease.The dotted line on Atlas map 67 indicates Clark's route; his camp west of the divide in Lemhi County, Idaho, is marked "W. C. Camp." The stream may be Pattee Creek. Peebles (RW), 7.It was probably Biddle who drew a red vertical line through this and the following lines about the mules.The site is marked "Inds. Masscured 1 year [ago?]" on Atlas map 67.Cutthroat trout and brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis. See Lewis's entry for this day.Clark's party went up Horse Prairie Creek, Bloody Dick Creek, and Trail Creek, all in Beaverhead County, Montana, heading for Lemhi Pass.The headwaters of Trail Creek, Beaverhead County, just below the Continental Divide. Modern geographers do not agree with the party's view of this spring as "the most distant fountain of the waters of the mighty Missouri" (see Lewis's entry for August 12, 1805).They crossed the Continental Divide at Lemhi Pass, into Lemhi County, Idaho, as Lewis's advance party had done on August 12.That is, from Camp Fortunate, at the forks of the Beaverhead. Clark's camp this day was perhaps on Pattee Creek, Lemhi County.Cutthroat trout.