June 19, 1805LewisWednesday June 19th 1805.
This morning I sent over several men for the meat which was killed yesterday, a few hours after they returned with it, the wolves had not discovered it. I also dispatched George DrewyerReubin Fields and George Shannon on the North side of the Missouri with orders to proceed to the entrance of Medecine river and indeavour to kill some Elk in that neighbourhood.    as there is more timber on that river than the Missouri I expect that the Elk are more plenty. The cash completed today. The wind blew violently the greater part of the day.    the Indian woman was much better this morning    she walked out and gathered a considerable quantity of the white apples of which she eat so heartily in their raw state, together with a considerable quantity of dryed fish without my knowledge that she complained very much and her fever again returned. I rebuked Sharbono severely for suffering her to indulge herself with such food he being privy to it and having been previously told what she must only eat. I now gave her broken dozes of diluted nitre untill it produced perspiration and at 10 P. M. 30 drops of laudnum which gave her a tolerable nights rest. I amused myself in fishing several hours today and caught a number of both species of the white fish, but no trout nor Cat. I employed the men in making up our baggage in proper packages for transportation; and waxed the stoppers of my powder canesters anew.    had the frame of my Iron boat clensed of rust and well greased.    in the evening the men mended their mockersons and prepared themselves for the portage. After dark my dog barked very much and seemed extreemly uneasy which was unusual with him; I ordered the sergt. of the guard to reconniter with
two men, thinking it possible that some Indians might be about to pay us a visit, or perhaps a white bear; he returned soon after & reported that he believed the dog had been baying a buffaloe bull which had attempted to swim the river just above our camp but had been beten down by the stream landed a little below our camp on the same side & run off.Observed Meridian Altitude of ☉'s L. L. with Octant by the back observation 53° 15' —"Latitude deduced from this observation 47° 8' 59.5"ClarkJune 19th Wednesday 1805
We went on the Island to hunt the White bear this morning but Could not find him, after plotting my Courses &c. I deturmined to dry the meat we killed and leave here, and proceed up the river as far as it bent to the S. E. and examine a Small Creek above our Camp, I Set out and found the Creek only Contained back water for 1 mile up, assend near the Missouri 3 miles to the bend, from which place it turnd. Westerly, from this bend I with 2 men went forward towards the Camp of the party to examine the best ground for the portage, the little Creek has verry extencive bottoms which Spread out into a varriety of leavl rich bottoms quite to the mountains to the East, between those bottoms is hills low and Stoney on this declivity where it is Steep. I returned to Camp late and deturmined that the best nearest and most eassy rout would be from the lower part of the 3rd or white bear Island, the wind all this day blew violently hard from the S W. off the Snowey mountains, Cool, in my last rout I lost a part of my notes which could not be found as the wind must have blown them to a great distance. Summer duck Setting    great numbers of buffalow all about our Camp OrdwayWednesday 19th June 1805.    a clear pleasant morning. Several men Sent over the River for the meat which was killed last night.    three hunters sent up to the head of the falls to a river called medicine River on the N. Side. we Set them across here in a canoe    we kept a canoe to cross the River in. the wind verry high from N. W.    we prepare to move the Goods & baggage &.C.


GassWednesday 19th.    A fine day, but the wind very high. Three hunters set out for Medicine river, a large river above the falls, which comes in on the north side, to hunt for elk. We finished the burying place, so that we will be ready to start as soon as Capt. Clarke returns. All our people are making mockasons to go through the prairie.


WhitehouseWednesday 19th June 1805.    a clear cool morning.    Several men Sent for the meat across the River which was killed last night.    the wind verry high from the West.    our Intrepters wife Some better.    three men Sent over the River to go up to the head of the falls to a river which falls in on that Stard Side, Called medicine River to hunt in order to prepare Elk Skins for the Iron boat.    we prepare to move the goods & baggage &c.    Saw large gangs of buffalow on the Side hills on the opposite Shore.    the wind continues high all day.    we are now 2580 odd miles from the mouth of Missourie—
Wednesday June 19th    This morning, we had clear & cool weather; some of our party was sent acros the River for the Buffalo kill'd, by some of our party Yesterday.    the Wind had blown very hard during the last night, our Interpreters Wife and the others that was sick recover'd fast, three of our party was sent over the River to go up to the head of the falls, to a River which falls into this River, lying on the North side; which we named Medecine River, they were sent to hunt for Elk, in order to get the Skins, to cover the Iron boat.—    We were employ'd at Camp in getting every thing in order, to move the Baggage &ca.    We saw large Gangs of buffalo on the hills side, on the Opposite shore; the wind continued high, during the whole of this day from the West, We are now 2,585 Miles, from the Mouth of the River Mesouri, We continued at this place this day, The land here is good, being chiefly Priaries, and producing fine Grass in abundance.—



Saltpetre, here used for fever. Chuinard (OOMD), 156.See identifications at entry of June 11, 1805.The wood duck, Aix sponsa [AOU, 144].Drouillard, Reubin Field, and Shannon, according to Lewis.Sun River, which meets the Missouri at the city of Great Falls, Cascade County,
Montana.