June 26, 1804ClarkTuesday June 26th    We Set out early    wind from the S. W.    on the Course of last nightS 62° W  ½me. on S. S.    an Island on the L: SideS 80° W  ½me. S. S, passed the mouth of a Small river called Blue
Water river (in french R. La Bléue)    this River heads with
the Mine river in a divideing ridge between the Kancis &Osage RiversN 87° W,1me. S. S.N 85° W3Ms. to point on the L. Side    Mdn. altd. 38° 32' 15" N.    high
land on S. S. abt. 90 foot high jutting over the riv[er]S 80 W.  ½me. L. S.S. 37° W2 ½ms. to pt. S. S.    psd. a large Danjerous Counter-Current on
the S. S. above Some rocks    a Small willow Isd. in the bend
to the L. S.    Killed a large rattle Snake    emence number of
Parrot-quetesS 58° W1me. alg S. S.    our Party on shor cam in    Killed 7 Deer, & 3
from the boatN 54 W.  ½me to a pt L. S at mouth of the Kansas River    CampedClarkJune 26th Tuesday 1804    we Set out early, the river falling a little, the wind from the S. W.    Passed the mouth of a Small river on the L. Side above the upper point of a Small Island, Called Blue water river, this river heads in Praries back with the Mine River about 30 yds. wide    Lattitude of a pt. 4 ms. above this river is 38° 32' 15" North, the high lands which is on the Northe Side does not exceed 80 feet high, at this Place the river appears to be Confd. in a verry narrow Channel, and the Current Still more So by Couenter Current or Whirl on one Side & high bank on the other, passed a Small Isd. in the bend to the L. Side    we Killed a large rattle Snake, Sunning himself in the bank    passed a bad Sand bar, where our tow rope broke twice, & with great exertions we rowed round it and Came to & Camped in the Point above the Kansas [WC: zás] River    I observed a great number of Parrot queets this evening, our Party Killed Several 7 Deer to dayCourse & Distance June 26thS. 62° W.  ½me. on the S. S. Isd. on L. S.S. 80° W.  ½me. on the S. S.    psd. Blue Water R    L. S.N. 87° W.1me. on the S. S.N. 85° W.3ms. to a pt. on the L. S. mdle [abt?]S. 80° W.  ½me. on L. S.S. 37° W.2 ½mes. to a pt. on S. S.    psd Ltt. Crt.S. 58° W.1me. on S. S.    psd. a bad placeS. 78° W.  ¾me. to the upr. pt. of Kansas R9 ¾= 366 & <¾> ms. to mouth of MissourisLewis(Point of observation No. 13.)
Tuesday June 26th
On the Larboard shore about four mes. above the mouth of the blue water river.—

Observed meridian altd. of ☉'s L. L. with octant by the back observt.    36° 10' —"

OrdwayTuesday June 26th 1804.    we Set out eairly proceeded on    passed an
 Island on the South Side    back of this Island a large Creek Comes in called Blue water Creek.    hills & high land along the River, Swift water this afternoon    the Rope Broak & the Boat Swong But Took no Injury.    at Sunset we arrived at the Kanses River, our flanking party joined us.    we camped on the fork between the Two Rivers.    on South Side of the Missouris, Several nations of Indians up this River,Floyd

[X: Tuesday June 26th    we set out early    proceeded on    passed a Island on the South Side, back of this Island a large Creek coms in call'd Blue Water Creek (River Le Bléue)    The Hills or High lands on the River which we passed last evening & this morning on L. S. is higher than usial from 160, to 180 feet.]    Encampt at the mouth of the Kansas River in the pint    it comes in <oppeset> on the Southe Side

GassTuesday 26th.    We embarked and set out at five o'clock in the morning; passed a creek on the south side, called Blue-Water. This afternoon we had some difficulty in passing a sandbar, the tow-rope having broke; but by the exertions of those on board, the boat was brought to shore without injury. We encamped on the south side on a point at the confluence of the Canzan, or Kanzas river with the Missouri. It was agreed to remain here during the 27th and 28th where we pitched our tents and built bowers in front of them. Canzan or Kanzas, is 230 yards and a quarter wide, and navigable to a great distance. Our hunters killed 4 deer, and a young wolf, and caught another alive. In the afternoon of the 29th we again proceeded on our voyage, and encamped on the north side of the river.


Whitehouse
Tusday 26th    the morning was Clear    the water was Strong at the head of the Island we Campd on    Got to the E.Shore, and towed Our boat by Cutting <our> the timber of the Banks    the day Got mighty hot    Saw 3 deer Swiming Down the River    the white peerogue took after them    Killd. the three    One of whom Sunk as Soon it Got Shot in the head    Got the Other two    Brought them Up to the Barge—    G Druery Killd 8 deer that day <Roed> took them on board 2miles before we Reachd the River deCaugh at Sun Set    Roed 10 Miles—
Tuesday June 26th    This morning being fine weather we embark'd early, and found the water running very strong at the head of the Island that we encamped on, we crossed the River to the North side, where we were oblig'd 
to Tow our boat the water running so strong against us, this was attended with a great deal of labour, being forced to cut the Timber off the bank in order to pass along it with the Tow rope, The day proving extreamly warm which still added to our fataigue; we saw three deer swimming down the River; The Men in the Pettyauger went after them, they killed them all; but one that was shot through the head, sunk, they then returned with the other two,
We proceeded on our Voyage about 2 Miles when George Drewer one of our hunters came to the River having killed 8 deer & brought them with him, we then took him on board, and proceeded on and encamped at the River decaugh at sunset, having towed the Boat 10 Miles.—

	
The Big Blue, or Blue, River enters the Missouri at Kansas City, Jackson County, Missouri. It heads in eastern Kansas, between the Kansas River and the Marais des Cygnes River, a major tributary of the Osage, a great distance from the Lamine River. It should not be confused with the better-known Big Blue River, which rises in Hamilton County, Nebraska, the enters the Kansas River at Manhattan, Kansas. MRC map 14.This camp just above the mouth of the Kansas, or Kaw, River, would be in present Kansas City, Wyandotte County, Kansas. It was the first camp of the expedition in that state, assuming no major changes in the mouth of the river. Clark apparently interlined a correction for the second syllable of "Kansas." He may have intended it as a guide to pronunciation rather than an amended spelling. Ibid.The Carolina parakeet, or parroquet, Conuropsis carolinensis [AOU, 382), which is now extinct. This is apparently the first reference to the species west of the Mississippi. Cutright (LCPN), 58.According to MRC map 14, made about 1892, the mouth of the Kansas was just over 390 miles above the mouth of the Missouri. Changes in the course of the Missouri River and the captains' tendency to underestimate river mileage account for the discrepancy.Lewis's observation from Codex O.Presumably a gray wolf, Canis lupus, killed on June 28, according to Ordway and Whitehouse.The camp of June 29 was in the vicinity of Riverside, Platte County, Missouri.Perhaps meaning Kaw, for the Kansas River; the camp was in present Kansas City, Wyandotte County, Kansas.