February 16, 1805Clark16th of February Satturday 1805
a fine morning, visited by but fiew Indians to day, at Dusk two of the Indians who wint down with Capt. Lewis returned, Soon after two others and one man (Howard) with his feet frosted, and informed that the Inds. who Commited the roberry of the 2 horses was So far a head that they could not be overtaken, they left a number of pars of Mockersons which, the Mandans knew to be Souix mockersons,—    This war party Camped verry near the last camp I made when on my hunting party, where they left Some Corn, as a deception, with a view to induc a belief that they were Ricarras.Capt Lewis & party proceeded on down    the meat I left at my last Camp was taken.
OrdwaySaturday 16th Feby. 1805.    a clear cold morning    one of our men got
lame and turned back.    the Indians all returned also, we proceeded on about 6 mls. to where their was Some lodges where Mr Gravelleens men was Robed last fall by some of the Mandanes.    when we came in Site we Saw a Smoak which we expected that they were all their waiting for another oppertunity to Seel more horses or to attach us.    we then went up the bank of the river a considerable distance above the place in to the bushes.    left the horse, sled & baggage even our blankets. Capt. Lewis Sent a Sergt. with a part of the men a little back from the River with orders to advance immediately after hearing the horn Sound which would be the Signal for us to fire in case of an attack. Capt. Lewis went with the rest of the party down the bank of the River untill we came to the lodges, where we found that they had left place 24 hours before that, & had Set 2 of the largest lodges on fire which caused the Smoak. I then Sounded the horn the other party came up, we found they had tore down the meat pen which our men had built & left 2 Elk in it.    they took the meat all away, except a fiew small peaces of buffaloe meat which they left in the small lodge which they broiled.    we found that they had left the River here and took up a Steep bluff in to the praries    we concluded not to follow them any further, but to turn in to hunting. Some proceeded on down the River.    4 men went down this bottom to hunt.    we marched about 10 miles and camped at the upper end of a bottom on S. S.    the hunters came up    one of them had killed a Deer which he brought in with him    2 or 3 men of the hunters went out towards evening.    one of them killed a deer & a wolf.—
GassSaturday 16th. We renewed our pursuit early, and had a cold morning. Having proceeded twelve miles we discovered fresh smoke arising at some old camps, where we had hid some meat before when  Captain Clarke was down; and therefore advanced with caution. Having arrived at the place we found the savages were gone; had destroyed our meat, burnt the huts and fled into the plains. This morning the Indians, who had come down with us and one of our men whose feet had been a little frozen, returned home. We hunted the 17th and 18th and got a good deal of meat which we brought to a place were some more had been secured. The 19th we loaded our sleds very heavy, and fifteen men drew one and the horse the other, which was a small one. On the next day we arrived at the fort much fatigued.

Whitehouse
Saturday Febry. 16th    We had a fine Clear day, the weather being moderate.—    Captain Lewis and the party under his command left their encampment at day light, in pursuit of the Savages.—    They continued on their March, untill 11 oClock A. M. when they arrived at the Point of Woods laying on the South side of the Mesouri River, Captain Lewis halted his Men at this place and sent out a Spy to find if any Indians were to be seen, The Spy return'd in a short time, and informed Captain Lewis, that he had perceived a Smoak on the opposite side of the River.    The Captain and party immediately crossed the Mesouri, to the opposite shore on the Ice, a small distance above, where the smoak was seen, On landing, the Men were formed in two divisions.    The Captain taking the Command of the right Wing, and the left wing he gave the Command of to one of our Serjeants, who was order'd to march in another Circular direction to what he was to march, with those which he commanded, in Order that both parties when they met, would be able to surround the fire from whence the Smoak issued.—Captain Lewis gave Orders to the Serjeant, that on hearing the Sound of a horn, the left Wing, would join the right with all the speed possible.—    Both parties then advanced towards where the smoak was, and perceived the fire, and found that those Savages, that they were in pursuit of, were gone, they having encamped (where we found the fire) the Night before, They burnt the Huts & meat that Captain Clark had left at that place, They found from Tracts, that those Savages had left the River, and had taken through the Priari, down along the River bank.—    Captain Lewis & his party joined by those that was under the command of the Serjeant, proceeded on their pursuit this day, but without success, In the Evening they encamped on the South Side of the River Mesouri.—

Probably the villages where Clark's party camped on February 9. See Clark's entry of February 13, 1805.