August 28, 1804Clark
28th August Tuesday, 1804 The wind blew hard last night    one Indian Stayed with us all night, Set out under a Stiff Breeze from S and proceedd on    passe a Willow Island at two miles    Several Sand bars    the river here is wide & Shallow full of Sand bars—    The High land appear to be getting nearer to each other    passed a Bluff containing Some white earth on the L. S.    below this Bluff for Some mile the Plain rises gradually to the hight of the Bluff which is 70 or 80 foot, here the Indian boy left us for his Camp—    Capt Lewis & my Self much indisposed—    I think from the Homney w[e] Substitute in place of bread, (or Plumbs)    we proceeded on about 3 Miles higher and Camped below the Calumet Bluff in a Plain on the L. S. to waite the return of Sergt Pryor & Mr. Durioun, who we Sent to the Soues Camp from the mouth of R: Jacque, before we landed the French rund a Snag thro: their Perogue, and like to have Sunk, we had her on loaded, from an examonation found that this Perogue was unfit for Service, & Deturmined to Send her back by the Party intended to Send back and take their Perogue, accordingly Changed the loads, Some of the loading was wet    wind blows hard from the South. J Shields & J. Fields joined    they did not overtake Shannon with the horses who is a head of us.1st: <The> Polsey}Bou Rouley gangue2 White Crain3 Little Bowl4 red handCours Dist. &S. 76° W.4 ½mes. to the lower part of a Bluff of white earth on the S. S
haveing passd. Several large Sand bars on each Side of the
waterS. 60 W.4mes.to the low part of the Calumet Bluff on the L. S. having
pass a point on east Side & Several Sand bars 8 ½ Clark28th August Tuesday 1804.		
Set out under a Stiff Breeze from the South and proceeded on    passd. a willow Island at 2 miles    Several Sand bars, the [river?] wide & Shallow at    4 Miles passed a Short White Bluff of about 70 or 80 feet high, below this Bluff the Prarie rises gradually from the water back to the Hight of the Bluff which is on the Larboard Side    here the Indian who was in the boat returned to the Sisouex    Camp on the R Jacque, Capt. Lewis & my Self much indisposed owing to Some Cause for which we cannot account    one of the Perogues run a Snag thro her and was near Sinking in the opinions of the Crew—    we came too below the Calumet Bluff and formed a camp in a Butifull Plain near the foot of the high land which rises with a gradual assent    near this Bluff I observe more timber in the valey & on the points than usial—    The Perogue which was injurd I had unloaded and the Loading put into the other Perogue which we intended to Send back, the <Perogue was mended the> Perogue & changed the Crew    after examoning her & finding that She was unfit for Service deturmined to Send her back by the party    Some load which was in the Perogue much inju'd
The wind blew hard this after noon from the South—    J. Shields & J. Fields who was Sent back to look for Shannon & the Horses joined us & informed that Shannon had the horses a head and that they Could not over take him    This man not being a first rate Hunter, we deturmined to Send one man in pursute of him with Some Provisions.—Course Dis: & reffrs. 28th Augt. 1804S. 76 W.4 ½mes. to the lower part of a Bluff of a Brownish red on S. S.,
passd. Sevl. Sand barsS. 60°W.4me. to the lower part of the Calumet Bluff. L. S.    passed a
pt. on each side and Several Sand bars. 8 ½ LewisOrders August 28th 1804.			
The commanding officers direct that the two messes who form the crews of the perogues shall scelect each one man from their mess for the purpose of cooking and that these cooks as well as those previously appointed to the messes of the Barge crew, shall in future be exempted from mounting guard, or any detail for that duty; they are therefore no longer to be held on the royaster.—M. Lewis Capt.
1st U' S. Regt. Infty.Wm Clark Cpt. &.
OrdwayTuesday 28th    a pleasant morning    we Set off eairly under a fine Breeze from S. E.    we proceeded on till Breakfast time    we then halted at a large prarie N. S.    the Indian left us in order to go to his camp; we proceeded on    passed handsome Groves of cottonwood Timber on boath Sides of the Missouri River.    passed high banks    high prarie on N. S. handsom & ascending graddually from the river, at 2 oClock P. M. the wind Blew hard from S. W.    the large pearogue drove against the Shore on N. S. & a hole got knocked in her So that it let the water in verry rapid they began to unload. Capt. Clark went with Some men from the Big Boat to their assistance.    they Soped in a Cappoe &.C. & made it Safe to cross.    we then crossed the river on S. S. & 
Camped to wait the arival of the men who went for the Indians & the Indians in order to counsel with them    Some of the party went out hunting    we hoisted a flag pole, the 2 men who had been out to hunt for the horses returned to the Boat    informed us that the horses & <the> Shannon was gone a head, we Saw Several large Bucks run at a distance from our Camp, this place is below a large Island & Sand bar    a hill & Bluff on the Same Side little above. Our Camp was in the handsome Bottom & Groves of oak Timber &.C—    appearance of rain.—

GassTuesday 28th.    We set forward early. The day was pleasant, and a fair wind from S. E. At 8 we halted for breakfast, when our young Indian left us to go to his camp at a handsome prairie, gently rising from the river on the north side; a small distance above which are beautiful groves of Cotton wood on both sides of the river. About 12 one of the periogues run against a snag which broke a hole in it. We then crossed to the south side to mend the periogue, and to wait to receive the Indians we expected; and landed a little below some high bluffs. Our camp was in a wide bottom, in which are large elm and oak trees.

Whitehouse
Tuesday 28th    we Set off eairly under a fine Breeze from S. E.    we passed high praries on N. S. handsome & ascending graddually from the river    at 2 oClock P m. the wind Blew hard from the S. W.    the <canoe> pearogue got a hole Broke in to hir by dashing a gainst a Snag, So that they had to begin to unload, but they Stoped the Water from comming in by Stopping in one thing & another.    So we went across the river on the South Side and camped to wait the arival of the Indians &c—    in order to counsel with them &c—    a flag pole raisd    this place is below a large Island & Sand bar below a hill & Bluff on the S. S. in a handsome Bottom & Groves of oak Timber, &c—
Tuesday August 28th    We set off early this morning with a fine Breeze from the South East; and all Sail set.    we proceeded on and passed some Priaries which lies high, they lie on the North side of the River, they appear very beautiful ascending gradually from the River, about 2 o'Clock P. M. the Wind blew hard from the South West    the boat plunging, had a hole broke in her by running against a Snag, so that we were obliged to put ashore, and had begun to unload her, but fortunately we got the hole stop'd    We crossed the River to the South side and encamped, to waite the arrival of our Men, which we had sent to find out the Indian Camp the day before; in order to hold a treaty with them, We here raised a Pole in order to hoist our flagg.—    This place lies below a large Island, and a sand barr and bluff & is below a hill, on the South side of the River.—    There is also a handsome bottom near it, with Groves of fine white Oak Timber growing on it.



Again the Niobrara Formation with its chalk. This bluff is in Cedar County, Nebraska, in the vicinity of present Beaver Creek. Atlas maps 7, 18; MRC map 30; MRR map 83.In Cedar County, just below the present Gavins Point Dam, which impounds Lewis and Clark Lake, and a mile west of the village of Aten. Calumet is a French term which has become common usage for the ceremonial Indian pipe, or "peace-pipe"; the etymology is complex. Atlas map 18; MRC map 30; MRR map 83; Mattison (GP), 53–55; Hodge, 1:191–95.Evidently they intended to send back Corporal Warfington's party with dispatches, as planned earlier but not accomplished until April 1805.Clearly a list of the most prominent men among the Sioux who arrived the next day. "The Polsey" was evidently the same man referred to elsewhere as "The Shake Hand." If Clark meant to write "palsey," we have the explanation for the other name. These may or may not be the chiefs listed by Ordway in his entries of August 30 and 31. See Quaife (MLJO), 119–23.Here Clark identifies the group of Sioux, or Dakotas, as the Bois Brulé; they were actually YanktonSioux. For discussion of these divisions, see below, August 31, 1804. Osgood (FN), 121 n. 2; Ronda (LCAI), 23–26.Colter was sent in pursuit of Shannon, but could not overtake him. They finally caught up with the wanderer on September 11.From the Orderly Book in Lewis's hand, except for Clark's own signature.Probably the American elm, Ulmus americana L.An unknown oak, Quercus sp.