December 24, 1805ClarkDecember 24th Tuesday—5
Some hard rain at different times last night, and moderately this morning without intermition    all hands employed in Carrying Punchens & finishing Covering the huts, and the greater part of the men move into them    a hard rain in the evening.Cuscalar the young Clot Sop Chief Came with a young brother and 2 young Squar, they gave or laid before Capt Lewis and my Self a mat and each a large Parsel of roots, Some time after he demanded 2 files for his Present    we returned the present as we had no files to Speare which displeased them a little    they then offered a woman to each which we also declined axcpting which also displeased them.    Jo Fields finish for Capt Lewis and my Self each a wide Slab hued to write on, I gave a handkerchief &c
ClarkTuesday 24th December 1805
hard rain at Different times last night and all this day without intermition.    men all employd in finishing their huts and moveing into them.Cuscalah the Indian who had treated me So politely when I was at the Clâtsops village, come up in a Canoe with his young brother & 2 Squars he laid before Capt Lewis and my Self each a mat and a parcel of roots—Some time in the evening two files was demanded for the presents of mats and roots, as we had no files to part with, we each rturned the present which we had received, which displeased Cuscalah a little.    he then offered a woman to each of us which we also declined axcepting of, which displeased the whole party verry much—    the female part appeared to be highly disgusted at our refuseing to axcept of their favours &c.
our Store of Meat entirely Spoiled, we are obliged to make use of it as we have nothing else except a little pounded fish, the remains of what we purchased near the great falls of the Columbia, and which we have ever found to be a convenient resort, and a portable method of curing fish
Ordway
Tuesday 24th Decr. 1805.    hard rain as usal.    we finished covering our huts and made fires in them. Some of the men moved in them this evening—


An asterisk is near the end of this line; its purpose is not known.On another occasion Clark was offered the sister of a Clatsop man who had received medical treatment; Clark declined. Biddle Notes [ca. April 1810], Jackson (LLC), 2:503.