May 20, 1806LewisTuesday May 20th 1806.
It rained the greater part of last night and continued this morning untill noon when it cleared away about an hour and then rained at intervals untill 4 in the evening.    our covering is so indifferent that Capt C. and myself lay in the water the greater part of the last night. Drewyer, and the two Feildses set out on a hunting excurtion towards the mountains. Shannon and Colter came in unsuccessfull, they had wounded a bear and a deer last evening but the night coming on they were unable to pursue them, and the snow which fell in the course of the night and this morning had covered the blood and rendered all further pursuit impracticable.    at 2 P. M. Labuish arrived with a large buck of the Mule deer speceis which he had killed on Collins's Creek yesterday.    he had left Cruzatte and Collins on the Creek where they were to wait his return.    he informed us that it was snowing on the plain while it was raining at our camp in the river bottom.    late in the evening Labuish and LaPage set out to join Collins and Cruzatte in order to resume their hunt early tomorrow morning.    this evening a party of indians assembled on the opposite bank of the river and viewed our camp with much attention for some time and retired.—    at 5 P. M. Frazier who had been permitted to go to the village this morning returned with a pasel of Roots and bread which he had purchased.    brass buttons is an article of which they people are tolerable fond, the men have taken advantage of their prepossession in favour of buttons and have devested themselves of all they had in possesson which they have given in exchange for roots and bread.
ClarkTuesday 20th May 1806
rained the greater part of the last night and this morning untill meridean when it Cleared away for an hour and began to rain and rained at entervals untill 4 P. M.    our Covering was so indefferent that Capt Lewis and my self was wet in our bed all the latter part of the night. Drewyer, Jos. & R. Fields Set out to towards the mountains. Shannon & Colter Came in without any thing.    they had Seen and Shot at a Bear and a Deer neither of which they Could get.    both of those Animals they must have Wounded Mortally, but the night Comeing on prevented their following them, and this morning the Snow had Covered the tracks and hid the blood and prevented their getting either of them.
at 2 P. M. Labiech Came in with a large Buck of the Mule Deer Speces which he had killed on Collins's Creek yesterday.    he left Collins and Peter Crusat on the Creek at which place they would Continue untill his return.    he informd. us that it was Snowing on the leavel plains on the top of the hill all the time it was raining in the bottom at our Camp. Labiech & Lapage returned to Collins & Crusat in the evening late for the purpose of Pursueing the hunt in the Morning early. Several Indians came to the opposit side of the River and viewed us some time.    at 5 P M Frazur who had leave to go to the Village returned with Some roots which he had purchased.    cloudy &c.

Ordway
Tuesday 20th of May 1806.    rained all last night and continues this morning, but Snows on the hills. Colter and Shannon returnd. had killd. nothing but had wounded a white bear. Soon after Labuche returnd. with the flesh of a large black taild. Deer which he had killd. but the Deer are Scarse & verry wild.    rained the greater part of the day.—

GassTuesday 20th.    We again had a very wet morning. Two more of our hunters came in, but had killed nothing. It continued raining till about noon, when we had fair weather with some sunshine. The hunters said it also snowed on the hills today, where they were hunting, while it rained at our camp. About 2 o'clock in the afternoon, another hunter came in and brought a deer that he had killed. In the afternoon four of our hunters 
again went out. In the evening there were some light showers.




Mule deer, Odocoileus hemionus.Shannon and Colter, say the captains.Labiche.According to the captains, Drouillard and the Field brothers set out in the morning, 
and Labiche and Lepage in the afternoon.