January 11, 1806LewisSunday [NB: Saturday] January 11th 1806.
Sent a party early this morning for the Elk which was killed on the 9th.    they returned with it in the evening; Drewyer and Collins also returned without having killed anything.    this morning the Sergt. of the guard reported the absence of our Indian Canoe, on enquiry we found that those who came in it last evening had been negligent in securing her and the tide in the course of the night had taken her off; we sent a party down to the bay in surch of her, they returned unsuccessfull, the party also who went up the river and Creek in quest of the meat were ordered to lookout for her but were equally unsuccessfull; we ordered a party to resume their resurches for her early tomorrow; this will be a very considerable loss to us if we do not recover her; she is so light that four men can carry her on their sholders a mile or more without resting; and will carry three men and from 12 to 15 hundred lbs.    the Cuthlâhmâhs left us this evening on their way to the Catsops, to whom they purpose bartering their wappetoe for the blubber and oil of the whale, which the latter purchased for beads &c. from the Killamucks; in this manner there is a trade continually carryed on by the natives of the river each trading some article or other with their neighbours above and below them; and thus articles which are vended by the whites at the entrance of this river, find their way to the most distant nations enhabiting it's waters.
ClarkSaturday 11th of January 1806
Sent a party early this morning for the Elk which was killed on the 9th    they returned with it in the evining; This morning the Serjt. of the guard reported that our Indian Canoe had gone a Drift, on enquiry we found that those who Came in it last evening had been negligent in Secureing her, and the tide in Corse of the night had taken her off; we Sent a party down to the bay in Serch of her, they returned unsecksessfull, the party who went up the river and Creek after meat were derected to look out for her but were equally unsecksessfull; this will be a verry considerable loss to us if we do not recover her, She is so light that 4 men Can Carry her on their Sholders a mile or more without resting, and will Carry four men and from 10 to 12 hundred pounds. The Cath lâ mâhs left us this evening on their way to the Clatsops, to whome they perpose bartering their wappato for the blubber & Oil of the whale, which the latter purchased for Beeds &c. from the Kil á mox; in this manner there is a trade Continually Carried on by the nativs of the river each tradeing Some articles or other with their neighbours above and below them, and those articles which are Vended by the whites at their enterance of this river, find their way to the most distant nations inhabiting its waters.
Ordway
Saturday 11th Jany. 1806.    our Small canoe got loose from the landing last night, & went away. Some time last night 7 men went with a canoe after the Elk meat. Several more went to look for the Small canoe.    towards evening we returned with the meat &C.

Whitehouse
Saturday Janry 11th    We had a number of Indians encamped near the fort last night, And this morning, we had pleasant weather.    Our small Canoe had went adrift during last night.    Our officers sent several of our Men up the River, in Order to bring the Elk meat, which the hunters had killed Yesterday to the fort.    Several of our Men were sent down the river, to look after the small Canoe, but did not find it.    We returned in the Evening with the Elk Meat—    The Indians left the fort, in order to return to their Villages.    We had Rain towards night.—


Including Sergeant Ordway.