May 19, 1805LewisSunday May 19th 1805.
The last night was disagreeably could; we were unable to set out untill 8 oclock A. M. in consequence of a heavy fogg, which obscured the river in such a manner that we could not see our way; this is the first we have experienced in any thing like so great a degree; there was also a fall of due last evening, which is the second we have experienced since we have entered this extensive open country.    at eight we set out and proceeded as yesterday by means of the cord principally, the hills are high and the country similar to that of yesterday. Capt Clark walked on shore with two of the hunters and killed a brown bear; notwithstanding that it was shot through the heart it ran as it's usual pace near a quarter of a mile before it fell.    one of the party wounded a beaver, and my dog as usual swam in to catch it; the beaver bit him through the hind leg and cut the artery; it was with great difficulty that I could stop the blood; I fear it will yet prove fatal to him.    on Capt. Clark's return he informed me that he had from the top of one of the adjacent hights discovered the entrance of a large stream which discharged itself into the Missouri on the Lard. side distant 6 or seven miles; from the same place he also saw a range of Mountains, bearing W. distant 40 or 50 miles; they appeared to proceed in a S. S. W. direction; the N. N. E. extremity of these mountains appeared abrupt.
This afternoon the river was croked, rappid and containing more sawyers than we have seen in the same space since we left the entrance of the river Platte.    Capt. C. in the course of his walk killed three deer and a beaver, I also walked on shore this evening a few miles and killed an Elk, a buck, and a beaver.    the party killed and caught 4 other beaver & 3 deer.Courses and distances May 19th 1805.S. 35° W.To a point of woodland on the Lard. side opposite to a
bluff  1 ¼SouthTo a point of timber on the Stard. side opposite high hills
on Lard. side  1 ½S. 75° W.To a point of woodland on Lard. side opposite to a bluff
on Stard.  1S. 20° W.To a willow point on Stard. side the river making a deep
bend to the E.  1 ½S. 30° W.Along the Stard. opposite to a bluff  1S. 60° W.To a point of woodland Stard. side opposite to a bluff  2 ½WestAlong the Lard. shore opposite to a bluff     ¾S. 60° W.Along the Lard. shore opposite to a bluff     ½S. 15° W.To a point of woodland on Stard. side opposite to a bluff a
deep bend to the South  3S. 20° W.To a point on the Lard. side.  1 ½S. 45° WTo a point of high timher on the Lard. opposite to a bluff     ¾South	To a point of Willows on the Stard. Sd.  1 ¾WestTo a point of low willows on the Lard. side opposite to the
lower point of a willow Island St. Side  1 ½S. 45° W.Along the Lard. point opposite to the upper point of the
Island; a bluff on the Stard. side     ½S. 10° E.Along the Lard. point opposite to a bluff, under which is
a shoal Stard. S., rappid water     ¼N. 45° E.To the point of a sandbar on the Stard. side passing re-
markable strong water     ½S. 45° E.To the timber on the Stard. point, opposite to a bluff on
Lard. where we encamped for the night     ½Miles—20 ¼				    
The men complain much of sore eyes and imposthumes.ClarkMay 19th Sunday 1805
a verry cold night, the murckery Stood at 38 at 8 oClock this morning, a heavy dew which is the 2d I have Seen this Spring. The fog (which was the first) was So thick this morning that we could not Set out untill the Sun was about 2 hours up, at which time a Small breeze Sprung up from the E. which Cleared off the fog & we proceeded on by means of the Cord    The hills are high & rugged the Countrey as yesterday—    I walked on Shore with two men    we killed a <brown> white or grey bear; not withstanding that it was Shot through the heart it ran at it's usial pace near a quarter of a mile before it fell.    Capt Lewis's dog was badly bitten by a wounded beaver and was near bleading to death—.    after killing the Bear I continued my walk alone, & killed 3 Deer & a Beaver; finding that the Perogues were below I assended the highest hill I could See, from the top of which I Saw the mouth of M. Shell R & the meanderings of the Missouri for a long distance. I also Saw a high mountain in a westerley direction, bearing S. S W. about 40 or 50 miles distant, in the evening the river was verry Crooked and much more rapid & Containing more Sawyers than any which we have passed above the River Platte    Capt Lewis walked on Shore this after noon & killed an Elk, Buck & a Beaver, I kiled three Deer at dinner, the hunters killed three other Deer to day    Several beaver also killed. We Camped on the Stard. Side in a bottom of Small Cotton woodmiles   Course & Distance May 19thS 35° W.  1 ¼to a point of wood land on the Lard Side opposit to a
Bluff. S. S.South  1 ½to a point of timber on the Stard. Side opposit High hills
on the Lard SideS. 75° W.  1to a point of wood land on the Lard. Side opposit to BluffS. 20° W.  1 ½to a willow point on the Std. Side the river makeing a
deep bend to the E.S. 30° W.  1allong the Stard. Side opsd. a BluffS. 60° W  2 ½to a point of wood land Stard Side opposit to a BluffWest     ¾allong the Lard Shore opsd. to a bluffS. 60° W.     ½allong the Lard. Point opposit to a bluffS. 15° W.  3to a point of wood land on the Stard. Side opsd. a bluff    a
Deep bend to the SouthS. 20° W.  1 ½to a point on the Lard SideS. 45° W.     ¾to a point of high timber on the Ld Side opposit to a bluffSouth  1 ¾to a point of willows on the Stard. SideWest  1 ½to a point of low willows on the Lard Side opsd. the lower
point of a willow Island S. S.S. 45° W.     ½allong the Lard point, opsd. the upper point of the Is-
land, a Bluff on the Std SideS 10° E.     ¼allong the Lard. point opsd. to a Bluff, under which is a
Shoal S. S.    rapid watersN. 45° E.     ½to the point of a Sand bar on the Stard Side passing Swift
waterS 45° E     ½to the timber on the Stard. point opposit to a Bluff on
Lard.    here we Camped for the nightmiles20 ¼OrdwaySunday 19th May 1805.    a heavy diew fell last night.    one of the party caught a beaver.    we Set off about 7 oC    Clear and pleasant.    we proceeded on.    about 10 oC. A. M. we killed a young brown bear, on the S. Shore.    passed pitch pine hills on each Side of the River and timbred bottoms. Semon Capt Lewiss dog got bit by a beaver.    one of the hunters on Shore killed a Deer.    about one oC. we halted to dine on N. S. at a bottom of c. wood timber. Capt Clark killed three deer.    about 2 we proceeded on    passed a willow Island near the N. Shore    passed high pitch pine & ceeder hills as usal.    passed bottoms on each Side covered with c. w. timber.    we Came about 18 miles this day & Camped on a timbred bottom on N. S.    [illegible words] place Capt Lewis killed an Elk. Some other of the hunters killed 3 deer & 3 beaver to day.


GassSunday 19th.    The morning was foggy and there was some dew. The river is handsome and the country mountainous. We made 20¼ miles and encamped on the North side in a small bottom.


WhitehouseSunday 19th May 1805.    a heavy diew fell last night.    a clear pleasant morning.    we Set off as usal and proceeded on.    passed pitch pine hills on each Side of the river.    about 10 oClock we killed a Small female brown bear on S. S.    we took on board the meat & Skin and proceeded on.    about 1 oC. we halted to dine at a bottom on the N. Side.    Capt. Clark killed 3 Deer.    about 2 we proceeded on    passed a handsom willow Island near the N. S. of River.    passed pitch pine & ceeder hills as usal, & bottoms of timber on each Side of the River.    we Came about 18 Miles and Camped at a bottom on the N. Side, where Capt. Lewis killed an Elk & Some of the men killed 3 Deer.    Some of the hunters killed 3 beaver to day.—
Sunday May 19th    A heavy dew fell last night, and this morning was clear and pleasant, we set off early, as usual; and proceeded on, and passed on each side of the River, hills cover'd with Pitch pine, about 10 o'Clock A. M. some of our party killed a small female brown bear on the South side of the River, we stopped for a short time; and took on board the Meat, and Skin of 
this bear, we then proceeded on till about One o'Clock, when we halted to dine in a bottom laying on the North side of the River, Captain Clark who had been on shore hunting, join'd us here; having killed 3 Deer, which was brought to us, by a party sent after them,—    At 2 o'Clock P. M we proceeded on our Voyage, and passed a handsome Island with Willows growing on it, lying on the North side of the River, & hills lying on both sides of the River; 
the growth on which was Pitch pine and Cedar, and fine bottoms of timber, we proceeded on till Evening, and encamped at a bottom lying on the North side of the River, Captain Lewis who had been out hunting with a party of our Men since we dined returned to us here having killed One Elk 3 deer and 3 Beaver.—    We came 18 Miles this day.—



The hill appears prominently on Atlas maps 38, 51, 59; it may be one of the bluffs (possibly Brandon or Mikey buttes) in the vicinity of later Horseshoe Point on the Missouri, which is now under Fort Peck Lake. The river Clark saw was the Musselshell. MRC map 68; USGS map Fort Peck Lake West.The Little Rocky Mountains, in Phillips and Blaine counties, Montana. Allen (PG), 264–65.Also given on Atlas map 38, in both captains' hands.Given as "N. 60 W." on Atlas map 38.The words "M. Shell R" appear to have been added to a blank space.In either Phillips or Garfield County, Montana, at or near the later Long Point, now under Fort Peck Lake. The site appears on Atlas maps 38, 39, 51, but not on map 59— apparently an omission by the copyist. MRC map 69.In either Phillips or Garfield County, Montana, depending on shifts in the river, and a few miles below the entrance of the Musselshell River. From "18" to "place" the text is partly missing from the bottom of a worn page. Considering other entries for this day, the missing words might be, "at this."