September 8, 1805ClarkSeptember 8th Sunday 1805
a Cloudy morning    Set out early and proceeded on through an open vallie for 23 miles    passed 4 Creeks on the right Some runs on the left, The bottoms as also the hills Stoney bad land. Some pine on the Creeks and mountains, an partial on the hills to the right hand Side.    two of our hunters came up with us at 12 oClock with an Elk, & Buck—    the wind from the N. W. & Cold. The foot of the Snow mountains approach the <Creek> River on the left Side. Some Snow on The mountain to the right also    proceeded on down the Vallie which is pore Stoney land and encamped on the right Side of the river    a hard rain all the evening we are all Cold and wet.    on this part of the river on the head of Clarks River I observe great quantities of a peculiar Sort of Prickly peare grow in Clusters ovel & about the Size of a Pigions egge with Strong Thorns which is So birded [bearded] as to draw the Pear from the Cluster after penetrateing our feet. Drewyer killed a Deer. I killed a prarie fowl    we found 2 mears and a Colt    the mears were lame, we ventered to let our late purchase of horses loose to night.
Ordway
Sunday 8th Sept 1805.    cloudy and cold.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on down this creek which is now verry large.    passed over Smooth plain    no timber except along the bank of the creeks. Saw Snow on the mount to our left.    high barron hills to our right.    about 11 oClock we halted to dine at a branch    our hunters joined us.    had killed an Elk, and a Deer which they brought with them.    the wind cold from the N. W. & Showers of rain, and a little hail.    passed over Smooth plains in this valley.    the Mountains are rough on each side and are covred with pine and on the tops of which are covd. with Snow.    our hunters found 2 Stray horses and a handsom colt, which they took along with them    we marched 20 odd miles this day and Camped on a Smooth bottom near the creek, where we had fine feed for our horses.    our hunters joined us    had killed one Deer.—


GassSunday 8th.    The morning was wet, and we proceeded on over some beautiful plains. One of our hunters had remained out all night, at noon we halted and they all came in, having killed an elk and a deer. At 2 we proceeded on again, and had a cold, wet and disagreeable afternoon, but our road or way was level along the valley. Having travelled 20 miles, we encamped and our hunters came in, one of whom had killed a deer, and another had caught two mares and a colt, which he brought with him.


WhitehouseSunday 8th Sept. 1805.    cloudy and verry chilley and cold.    we Set out eairly and proceeded on down this large creek or Small River.    passed over Smooth dry plains.    no timber only along the River, which is large pitch pine    the bottoms wide.    we crossed Several creeks.    Saw Snow on the Mountains to our left.    high barron hills to our right.    about 11 oClock we halted to dine at a branch    our hunters all joined us.    had killed an Elk & and a Deer, Which they brought with them.    the wind from N. W. chilley and cold.    the Snow lays thick on the mot. a little to our left.    we delayed and let our horses feed about 2 hours, and proceeded on down the valley.    had Several Small cold Showers of rain & a little hail.    passed over level Smooth plains in this valley.    the Mountains are rough on each Side and are covered with pine and the tops of which are covered with Snow.    Some 
places appear to lay thick.    one of our hunters found & caught 2 horses and a handsom Colt.    we take them along with us though the horses are lame.    we expect that to be the reason that the natives left them in these bottoms.    we travveled 20 odd miles this day and Camped at the Creek and Smooth bottom where was fine feed for our horses.    our hunters all joined us    one of them had killed a Deer.    crossed Several branches in course of the day.—
Sunday Septemr. 8th    A cold chilly Cloudy morning.    We set out early and proceeded on our Journey.—    We went down this large Creek or small River, we passed over smooth dry plains, but no timber to be seen excepting what grew along the Creek, which were large Pitch Pine trees.—    The bottom land along this large Creek were wide & the Soil very rich.—    We crossed several small Creeks, which made into the large Creek which we left this morning.—    We saw Snow lying on Mountains, which lay to the South of us, & high Barren hills, which lay to the North likewise of us.—    About 11 o'Clock A. M. we halted to dine at a Creek.—    Our hunters all joined us here, they had killed an Elk & one Deer, which they brought to us.    The 
Wind has been from the N West during this day & the Air chilly & Cold.—    The Snow still continues on the Mountains, a small distance to the South of us.    We delayed about 2 hours to let our horses feed, we then proceeded on down the Valley & had several small showers of rain accompanied with hail.—    We passed over level smooth plains in this Valley, the Mountains on each side of which, are rough, and are cover'd with Pine Trees, the Tops of which are Covered with Snow & the snow appears to lay thick in many places on these Mountains.—    One of our hunters came across 2 Strange horses & a Colt, which he caught.—    We took those horses & Colt along with us, the horses were lame & we expected that the Natives had left them in this Valley, on that account.    We came 25 Miles this day as near as we can guess, and encamped at a Creek, on a smooth bottom of land.    We found here fine food for our horses.    Our hunters joined us in the Evening.    They had killed only one deer which they brought to us.—


Including present Skalkaho Creek, Gird Creek, Willow Creek (near modern Corvallis, Ravalli County, Montana), Soft Rock, Birch, Spoon, and Willoughby creeks. Atlas map 68.On the left were the Bitterroot Mountains and on the right the Sapphire Mountains. Atlas map 68.In the neighborhood of modern Stevensville, Ravalli County. Atlas map 68. The "Scattered Creek" of today's last course (see with entry of September 9) could be the numerous streams that come into the Bitterroot River at this point, including Mill, North Spring, and Burnt Fork creeks, and the several dividing branches of the latter.Brittle prickly pear, noticed by Lewis on August 13, 1805.On their left were the Bitterroot Mountains and on their right the Sapphire Mountains.Near Stevensville, Ravalli County, Montana.Drouillard.